Introduction:
With the growing effects of climate change, natural disasters will increase in frequency and severity in the coming years. Forest fires are one such event that has cost governments billions of dollars in damages and severe loss of civilian life in recent memory. As the global population increases, the need to identify and categorize areas where deadly wildfires are likely to occur is critical to ensuring their damage to life and property is mitigated. According to the Center for Climate and Energy Solutions, “changes in climate create warmer, drier conditions. Increased drought, and a longer fire season are boosting these increases in wildfire risk (c2es.org).” In order to facilitate better central planning and preparation, fire response teams should understand the conditions surrounding a wildfire and its potential scope and damage beforehand. Conclusions from this study might be of assistance in this matter.
The data we have contains 517 forest fires from the Montesinho Natural Park in Portugal from January 2000 to December 2003. The data we will be using was recorded by a station run by the Braganca Polytechnic Institute and includes the size of the total area burned by the fire and other atmospheric and geographical conditions surrounding the blaze.
Our main objective is to identify which pre-conditions to a forest fire most contribute to its severity and the seasons in which they occur. To determine severity, we will be using the variable “area,” which signifies the fires' total burned area in hectares.
The mean area value is 12.895 hectares, while the high range (1090.740) and far right-skewed data and high standard deviation (63.646) suggest that there are significant variations in-between fires; the goal of this report is to identify if these notable differences can be indicated — or correlated — with two other variables also collected in the same data set. These two other variables, which will be featured in the discussion questions, are the following: “RH” (relative humidity) and “month” (month of the year). While RH is a quantitative variable that measures atmospheric conditions, month represents a categorical variable indicating the month of the year in which the fire occurred.
The following is a histogram of the data for the variables “month”:
The quantitative variable RH (relative humidity in %) has a mean of 44.288, a range of 85, and a standard deviation of 16.317. The following is a histogram of relative humidity measured when wildfires occurred:
Understanding The Distribution of Fire Intensity
The first question of this report considers the distribution of the “area” variable. We wish to determine the average area a wildfire will cover and the distribution of wildfire severity (in terms of ha burned) for the purpose of deciding if human intervention may be required.
The initial hypothesis we make is that most fires recorded are of medium size, as large fires are uncommon due to their severity and small ones are too limited in size and duration to be recorded. This requires the assumption that fires small enough to have a negligible area burnt are overlooked due to limited sensitivity on measuring stations. To collect data on a wildfire, there must be some form of sensor which causes data recording to occur at a certain trigger in order to avoid false positives. Data points which represent the set thus must at least be significant enough to be considered a small to medium wildfire.
Large wildfires, on the other hand, are unlikely to be commonplace, as areas of the forest once burned are less likely to be burned in the near future, while vegetation and other fuel for the flames must recover over time. Therefore, our inital prediction is that the majority of data points for the area will be from 10 - 50 hectares, with a few right outliers. However, when analyzing the data, we find that 82.42% (422/512) of all recorded fires have an area variable of below 10, while there are only a few outliers with large values for the area. In fact, 48.06% (246/517) of the recorded fires have an area value of 0.1 hectares or below. According to the information provided with the data set, “the area burned by the fire is in hectares; any small fire that burned less than 0.1 ha has been capped at 0.1 ha.” To demonstrate the magnitude of the range and outliers for data regarding this variable, the following is a box plot of the area:
This distribution is clearly right-skewed with a relatively short right tail and has large outliers at 746.28 and 1090.84. We observe that most fires are very small, and it is only a few outlier fires that grow large enough to become a threat to larger amounts of forest land. With the assumption that almost all fires under the side of 0.1 hectares burned are too small to have been extinguished by firefighter teams called in for that specific job and can be considered unlikely to cause significant damage to the forest, we suggest that the vast majority of wildfires do not require human intervention. It is only a specific few which undergo the correct conditions for a transformation into a severe blaze capable of causing significant damage. The effect a wildfire causes is thus not unified but varies greatly, and it is thus highly important for researchers to be able to pinpoint which wildfires specifically are likely to burn large areas.
From an analysis of the first and third quartile and the interquartile range, it can be seen from table 2 that individual points grow further apart as the area increases. One possible explanation for the first quartile being very close to the median while the third is much further is that it is highly difficult for a fire to grow from a small size to a large size, so the data clusters close to zero. Another might be that the outliers had an unduly-large effect on the mean and distribution ranges. A final explanation is that the majority of recorded flames are under 0.1 hectares due to the precision of data recording and the high likelihood that small fires occur frequently.Our initial hypothesis — that most fires are of medium size — is contradicted by the data analyzed. The vast majority of recorded wildfires are under 10 hectares (over 82%), and it appears that it is very common for small fires to start and then stop before burning any significant amount of land. The assumption that the measuring equipment is only able to recognize fires once they have grown to a certain size appears to be flawed, as the data set notes that “any small fire that burned less than 0.1 ha has been capped at 0.1 ha.” — suggesting that the monitoring equipment is sensitive enough to measure wildfires which burn an area of less than 0.1 ha. The data is heavily right-skewed and with a short right tail, appears as though relatively-medium-sized wildfires are uncommon, and large fires are even rarer. This is likely due to, as mentioned before, the time it takes for the forest to recover burnable vegetation after a fire sweeps through, making many large fires in a year more unlikely.
Determining Relationship Between Area (hectares burnt) and month (Month of Year).
The second question of this report considers whether the month of the year is associated with fire severity and, if so, identifies their relationship. It stands to reason that certain months have different cyclic factors which lend themselves to a greater or lesser intensity wildfire. Weather patterns and human activity, for example, are two factors that are closely related to the time of year.We will make the initial hypothesis that wildfires are more likely to occur and cause significantly more damage in the summer (June, July, August) months and are less likely to occur with less intensity during the winter (November, December, January) months. This is because conditions during summer appear to be more conducive to wildfires — hotter and drier days — and vice versa for winter. Thus, autumn and spring are also theorized to have forest fire severity in the middle of the other two seasons, as we will assume they represent a middle ground in terms of temperature and rainfall.To study this hypothesis, we will first note the previous graph of months in which fires occurred (figure 1), which observes that the most fires recorded occurred in August, September, and March, while the least fires occurred in January, May, and November. From that data, it appears as though our hypothesis is partially incorrect — while the winter months (November, December, January) does appear to have the least number of fires and the summer months far more, September has almost as many fires as August, May has almost none, and March has a surprisingly high number as well.However, as we measure severity, not frequency, we need to analyze the area variable, as what matters is not the number of fires but how many hectares are burnt. This allows us to place more priority on severe wildfires, which are the ones that are a cause of concern. To find this, we find the individual area variables of each fire, then sum them up and categorize them by month to find the Total Area per Month of Year, as follows:
From the results of figure 4, it is clear now that although there appears to still be a slightly greater risk of wildfire in March, the severity of those flames is significantly less than that of the latter-summer and early-fall months. It can also be observed that although there are fewer fires in September, their severity appears to be greater, as the total area burned is larger.
As such, our hypothesis appears to be contradicted by the data. While there does appear to be greater severity in fires during the summer and less during the winter, the greatest wildfires occur in the first month of autumn, and there is also a small rise in fires in March. When viewing how each month contributes to the total area burnt in a year, we can use the following pie chart:
Another explanation could be that due to geographical reasons, the seasons in the sample group (Montesinho natural park) occur later, meaning the park experiences the greatest risk factors later in the year. A final explanation is that there are lurking variables unaccounted for in this research analysis that lend autumn to be high-risk for fires — as an example, perhaps the trees in the forest are deciduous, and the dried dead leaves create the perfect circumstances for large wildfires.
Concerning the small peak in March, a possible explanation this report suggests is that there may be several weeks in March where there is a sudden heatwave or other cyclic condition that lends itself to greater severity fires. It is possible that if a portion of the fires is caused by human activity, March may be a time where tourism or related activities occur in the area. Whatever the reason, it is important for wildfire research and prevention to consider both the likelihood a wildfire will occur in a certain month and the chance it will be significant. August and September appear to be the highest risk for both.
Determining Relationship Between RH (Relative Humidity) and area (hectares burnt)
The third question of this report considers whether the relative humidity of the forest is associated with the area burned. It stands to reason that less humidity in a forest would lend itself to fires of greater severity, and when humidity is high, it may be more difficult for wildfires to grow out of control. This is because higher water content in plants is known as a factor that decreases the likelihood of fires starting due to its high specific heat constant. When the temperature rises, water absorbs heat energy, lowering the heat of its surroundings, and becomes converted into steam (water vapor).
We observe that data was obtained within 30 minutes of the fire starting. If there is a high amount of water vapor in the air, then we assume there is a relatively-larger amount of water in the surrounding vegetation. As wetter climates with greater amounts of water in the surrounding environment are shown by previous studies to be less conducive to large fires, we predict that there is a negative, significant linear correlation between RH and area.
However, after calculating correlation, we find that there is only a -0.076 linear correlation between RH and area. This signifies that if there is a linear correlation, it is a very weak negative linear relationship. As such, the data does not appear to support a strong linear association between RH and area.
One possibility for why the outliers appear to all have low RH values while the correlation is very weak could be because RH's graph is right-skewed with a long right tail. The following is the histogram for RH, restated for ease from figure 2:
An explanation for these results could be that the water vapor measured in the air represented water “already evaporated” from the surrounding vegetation, and thus its effect on preventing high temperatures and fire growth was partially negated. Another could be that the believed effects of greater humidity on the severity of fires are negligible. Finally, there could be another lurking variable that counteracts the effects RH has on the total area burned.
From the results of this research question, it does not appear as though the variable RH is a strong indicator of the variable area; we do not have evidence to conclude that there is a strong correlation between the two.
Discussion:
This paper considered the severity of 517 forest fires from the Montesinho Natural Park in Portugal from January 2000 to December 2003. It analyzed its relationship with the month of the year and the relative humidity in which the fires occurred. Based on the data observed, we can conclude that August, July, and September, in increasing order, have the most severe risk for fire damage by area, while January, May, and November have the least. We have also found that relative humidity does not appear to have a significant linear relationship with the total area burned and as such we do not recommend using it as a tool to predict fire severity.
Limitations of this study primarily revolve around the scope. Montesinho National Park is not representative of all global forests or even of all forests in Portugal. Climate conditions vary greatly worldwide, and conclusions drawn from the study of one forest can only be applied to itself with confidence. Other factors which impact the potential range of this study revolve around the limited biodiversity (a single park) of the studied sample, as the data for forest fires may be impacted by the plant life and terrain it occurs in, and the time frame; January 2000 to December 2003 is only three years in total. Concerns also exist regarding the effects of climate change on data — conclusions drawn 17 years ago are likely to be less relevant given the rapid ecological and meteorological changes over the last decade.
For this study, we would have appreciated data being collected from more sources (to avoid bias from one sample station), data from several forests around the globe, and for data to have been collected from a longer period of time. Specific other variables, such as the time duration of wildfires and the causation of the fire would be appreciated to help produce more accurate conclusions, as would insight into the mechanisms behind identifying and recoding fire data. Currently, the study's scope and the data collected only concern a few variables from a single park over a brief period of time.
Future studies need to be conducted regarding the risk factors for forest fires. There have been several significant cases in the last few years that lead to loss of life and property; as climate change continues to increase in severity, there needs to be a concerted effort to analyze forest fires from more areas over a longer period of time, and draw more conclusive results about how we can detect, combat and mitigate the worst wildfires, which are bound to occur in the coming years.
