An Examination of the relationship between Age of Youtube Account and Success on Youtube
Introduction:
Over the past decade, Youtube has grown from a relatively unknown website into a video platform with channels gaining millions of subscribers and individual videos gaining over tens of millions of views. It is now possible for people to have a career as a Youtuber, by gaining revenue from ads on Youtube videos. One would think that the longer that one has an account on Youtube and the more videos one has uploaded, the more popular and the more views, subscribers, etc. one would have. In this analysis, we will examine exactly how the age of one’s Youtube account is related to various measures of success on Youtube such as subscriber count and view per video. We will also examine whether the amount of video uploads has an impact on the success of the channel.
Data:
The dataset we are examining comes from a site called Social Blade which tracks analytics that are useful to Youtubers such as number of subscribers, number of views, and the average number of views per video. The dataset provides information up until the end of 2018 for 1259 Youtube channels.
We will first provide some context for the data we will examine. All of the channels are categorized by topic, with topics such as Entertainment, Music, Gaming, Lifestyle, etc. See the graph below for the distribution of topics to channels. Entertainment has by far the most channels. Music is a far second and the rest of the topics have roughly the same amount of channels.
There is also data on which country and continent each channel came from. For the continents, the Americas have the most amount of channels at 634, while Asia and Europe come in second and third with 405 and 178 respectively. Oceania and Africa have far less channels (26 and 16 respectively).
Below are some graphs displaying the general spread of account age in this dataset. Account age is measured in weeks, measured on December 31, 2018 for consistency. We can see from the histogram that account age is a generally unimodal variable and is right skewed. The mean account age is 305 weeks, with a standard deviation of 173.1 weeks. The median is 266 weeks and the range is 667 weeks.
In the side by side boxplots comparing accountAge for each category of channel in the next figure, we can see there is no significant difference in the range between different categories. There is some variation between the medians but it is not very significantly different.
The average number of views per video is calculated by taking the total number of views for the channel divided by the total number of videos the channel has. We can see from the histogram below that this graph is very highly right skewed. There are a number of high outliers. The median is 1.03 million, the mean is 2.9 million, the minimum is 4 thousand, and the maximum is 211.3 million (the second highest outlier is 88.8 million).
The distribution of the total number of video uploads is also intensely right skewed with a large number of very high outliers. The mean is 4460 videos, with a standard deviation of 13608. The median is 682 videos. This large difference between the mean and median also shows the skewness of this variable. The minimum number of videos uploaded is 1, and the maximum is 130 thousand. This disparity in number of videos uploaded may highly influence how the number of views per video metric will change for each channel, since having a few really popular videos (and only those videos) will greatly increase views per video compared to a channel with many popular videos (but also many videos in general).
Research Questions
Note: All of the graphs in this section are zoomed in to show the relationships in the scatterplots better, since there are a large number of high outliers for the quantitative measures of success variables.
Based on intuition, we would hypothesize that the greater the account age, the greater the number of subscribers, since the longer a Youtube account is active, gradually more popularity can be accumulated. We can see from the scatterplot below plotting account age vs number of subscribers that there is a positive relationship and positive linear fit.
When we examine the relationship between account age and subscribers with different linear fits for each category displayed on the graph, we can see that all of the categories have a similar positive linear fit, just with difference in the scale of correlation.
The correlation coefficients for each category are displayed in the next table. The category with the lowest correlation coefficient is Music with 0.223, while the category with the highest correlation coefficient is News and Politics with 0.466. The range between those is .243 which is a greater range than we would have expected. We would think that the all categories of channels would have around the same correlation between account age and number of subscribers since that’s a broad generalizable behavior. We could further examine why there’s a difference in amount of correlation between categories in a future study.
Relationship between account age and amount of views per video.
To see the relationship between the account age and views per video, we plotted a scatterplot. Visually, there is not a clear relation between account age and views per video. The linear fit is horizontal as well.
If we plot the relationship with linear regression lines for each category of channel, we can see the line for education is the only one with a positive fit, while the rest of the categories have a negative fit or horizontal line (no relationship).
Relationship between number of videos uploaded and number of subscribers
From the scatterplot displayed below, there is no clear relation between the number of video uploads and the number of subscribers a channel has. The subscriber count is highly dense toward the lower end of subscriber number, which makes sense given that there are some high outliers for the number of video uploads. The linear fit seems mostly horizontal which does not indicate a clear positive or negative relationship. The correlation coefficient calculated is 0.037 which also corresponds to no relationship. This is surprising, given that we predicted that more videos uploaded would mean more subscribers to the channel. However, there is no relationship in the data.
Discussion
Our analysis found that there is a generally high correlation between the age of the channel and the number of people subscribed to it, which was expected. (We also saw a similar relationship between account age and the total number of views, not examined here.) However, when we looked at the relationship between age of account and number of views per video, we found no relationship. It is surprising that account longevity has no bearing on this measure of success but does have a relationship to number of subscribers. This might be explained by the fact that popularity of channels in terms of view count per video may fluctuate greatly over time as the popularity increases or decreases. One interesting finding is that there is a correlation between age of account and views per video for only videos in the Education category - perhaps the Education based channels have a loyal following. Finally, there is no strong relationship between number of videos uploaded and subscriber count, which is also surprising. However, the correlation for these variables varies between video topic category. This could be further examined in the future. This data does not have information on characteristics of the content creaters such as age, race/ethnicity, or their intended audience (kids, young adults, adults, etc.) If that data was collected, we could perform some more analysis to see whether these characteristics are related to these measures of success. It would also be interesting to see if the time period in which channels are active (early 2000s, late 2000s, early 2010s, beyond) has any relationship to success as well.
These relationships examined can inform Youtubers who make a career on this platform, in the way that they can take comfort in the fact that number of videos uploaded does not have a relationship to account success.
