Introduction:
Dating apps are the new craze, with a multitude of different versions seemingly appearing from thin air in the past few airs. Big dating apps include Tinder, Hinged, and Bumble. One such dating app is called OkCupid, and like most dating apps, OkCupid lets their users create their own profile. One of the interesting parts of a user's profile is whether they use drugs or not. In this study, we would like to see how often someone uses drugs affects other factors of their life. What are the ages of the most avid drug users, or those who abstain from drugs? How about their income? And what about relationship status? These will all be answered in this study.
Dataset:
In this dataset, we will analyze both categorical and quantitative data based off a sample of public user profiles from OkCupid. This sample size includes 1500 users, who had active profiles during June of 2012. The 1500 profiles were based on volunteered sampling. Data was collected by a python script software, which drew data from active profiles during June of 2012 if the profile had at least one profile picture.
The entire dataset includes 16 variables: age, body type, diet, drinking habits, drug use, education, ethnicity, height, income, job, offspring, orientation, pets, sex, smoking habits, and relationship status. Our study specifically analyzed income, relationship status, and age with our main variable: drug usage.
This is a bar chart showing the age of OkCupid users and the frequency of each age. As you can see, it’s relatively normal, but skewed a little to the right, with most users being from the age of 25-40.
This is a bar chart showing the income of OkCupid users and the frequency of each bracket in the dataset. As expected, income is skewed to the right with the most people being from the 0-50,000 income bracket. What’s noticeable here is that there are a good number of people who said their income is above 1 million. Perhaps this can be attributed to people lying about their income on the app.
This is a histogram showing the count of people in the dataset based on how often they classify their drug usage. “Never” was chosen the most, “sometimes” was second most, and “often” was chosen the least.
Our first hypothesis considers the relationship between drug usage and age. Due to drug usage becoming more popular recently, we hypothesize that younger individuals, between the ages of 18-30, will be more likely to use drugs than older individuals. Essentially, we predict that the mean age for users who answered “often” or “sometimes” will be different from the mean age for users who answered “never”.
Age varied for each user from 18 to 65. Regarding status, users that indicated “sometimes” and “often” are considered to be drug users. Users who chose “never” are said to be non-drug users. Some users preferred not to indicate their drug usage.
As seen on Table 1 above, the sample means of age for drug use are slightly different. The mean age for people who answered “never” was the highest. The mean age for people who answered “often” was the lowest. Standard deviation is greatest for people who answered “never”.
As seen in figure 5, the medians are different as well. The answer “never”, represented by the green, has the highest median, with 32 years. “Often”, represented by the red, has the lowest median, with 26.5 years.
Along with figure 5, we assess our hypothesis with a hypothesis test for the difference in means. We will use one-way ANOVA here since we have more than two groups. In order to use the one-way ANOVA test, we have to make sure of several things first. First, we have to make sure there is a significantly large sample size for each group. For “never”, there are 961 people. Since this is greater than 30, it is a large enough sample size. For “sometimes”, there are 310 people. This is also large enough. For “often”, there are only 20 people, which isn’t larger than 30. However, for now, we can combine the people who said “sometimes” and “often” under the same group of people who are drug users, so we can move on with the ANOVA test. We note our concerns for not satisfying this, but will continue with our study and will revisit it in the discussions section of the report. We also have to make sure the standard deviations of each group are relatively similar to use the ANOVA test. As you can see from Figure 1, the standard deviations are relatively similar.
We can carry out the test at the level of 0.01. Performing the test, we get a test statistic of F = 22.5416 and a p-value that is approximately 0. Since the p-value falls below our threshold of 0.01, we reject the null hypothesis that all means are equal, and conclude that there is sufficient evidence for a relationship between age and drug usage.
Our second hypothesis considers the relationship between drug usage and income. Due to the fact that richer individuals have more money to spend on drugs, which usually are more expensive, we hypothesize that those who use drugs have a higher income. Essentially, we predict that the mean income for users who answered “often” or “sometimes” will be different from the mean income for users who answered “never”.
Income varied for each user from 20,000 to 1,000,000. Regarding status, users that indicated “sometimes” and “often” are considered to be drug users. Users who chose “never” are said to be non-drug users. Some users preferred not to indicate their drug usage.
As seen on Table 2 above, the sample means of income for drug use are slightly different. The mean income for people who answered “often” was the highest. The mean income for people who answered “never” was the lowest. Standard deviation is greatest for people who answered “often”.
Along with figure 6, we assess our hypothesis with a hypothesis test for the difference in means. We will use one-way ANOVA here since we have more than two groups. In order to use the one-way ANOVA test, we have to make sure of several things first. First, we have to make sure there is a significantly large sample size for each group. For “never”, there are 961 people. Since this is greater than 30, it is a large enough sample size. For “sometimes”, there are 310 people. This is also large enough. For “often”, there are only 20 people, which isn’t larger than 30. However, for now, we can combine the people who said “sometimes” and “often” under the same group of people who are drug users, so we can move on with the ANOVA test. We note our concerns for not satisfying this requirement, but will move on and address it in the discussions section of the report. We also have to make sure the standard deviations of each group are relatively similar to use the ANOVA test. As you can see from Figure 1, the standard deviations are relatively similar.
We can carry out the test at the level of 0.01. Performing the test, we get a test statistic of F = 25.4705 and a p-value that is approximately 0. Since the p-value falls below our threshold of 0.01, we reject the null hypothesis that all means are equal, and conclude that there is sufficient evidence for a relationship between income and drug usage.
Question 3: Does drug usage have an effect on relationship status?
Our third hypothesis considers the relationship between drug usage and relationship status. Due to the fact that those who use drugs might be more focused on drugs than getting into a relationship, we hypothesize that those who are single are more likely to use drugs. Essentially, we predict that drug use is associated with relationship status.
H0: Drug use and status are independent, and are not associated.
HA: Drug use and status are dependent, and show an association.
Because we are looking at two categorical variables, we will use a chi-squared test, which will determine if there is an association between our two variables.
The use of this test is justified by randomly sampled data that is independent and requires the expected cell counts to be at least 5. Although the data was taken from a sufficiently large population, the data was not randomly sampled and not all expected cell counts were at least 5. We take note of this, but will continue with our study as we will address this in the discussions section of the report.
Table 3 above shows the observed cell counts from the original dataset of 1500 users. Using observed values, we can calculate the expected cell count values (if the null hypothesis is true), by using the product of the observed marginals divided by the grand total. Computing the chi-squared value requires both the observed and expected cell counts. We observe the chi-squared value to be 27.07, which in turn indicates a p-value of 0.00755. Since this p-value is less than a significance level of 0.05, we reject the null hypothesis. From this, we can conclude that there is sufficient evidence of an association between drug usage and relationship status. This means that these two categorical variables are not independent.
Discussion
From our study of the OkCupid dating app, we have found a few crucial relationships dealing with drug usage. First, we use an ANOVA test to conclude that there is sufficient evidence for a relationship between age and drug usage. Second, we used another ANOVA test to conclude that there is sufficient evidence for a relationship between income and drug usage. Last, we use a chi-squared test to conclude that there is an association between drug usage and relationship status.
Although we were able to run ANOVA tests and chi-squared tests for our study, there were a few limitations. To run ANOVA, we needed at least 30 people in each group for a sufficient sample size, however, there were only 20 people who answered “often” for drug usage, and thus we did not reach the necessary 30 people. On top of that, both ANOVA and chi-squared tests require random sampling, but our dataset was based upon volunteer sampling. In addition to random sampling, the chi-squared test required an expected cell count of at least 5, and our data did not satisfy this requirement. Because of this, our data may be a bit inaccurate.
Future studies should try to fix the errors we had in our study. They should first try to randomly sample individuals. Random sampling is a much better way to collect a sample than voluntary sampling, and will thus garner better results. On top of that, more people should be sampled in order to gather more individuals who answer “often” for drug usage. As long as more than 30 people answers “often”, then the ANOVA test can be applied accurately.
In conclusion, our study shows how drug usage is related to many factors, such as age, income, and relationship status.
