Introduction
Dating apps have become a primary and easy mode of finding desirable qualities within the people around us and seeking out partners. Apps have made it very easy to find out important traits in potential partners, with habits like drug use and physical well-being appear as soon as someone’s profile is viewed. The increasing use of dating apps begs the question of how habits like drug use and well-being correlate with one another. Many people refuse to date people involved with drug use out of the assumption that they are not fit physically or emotionally (as stated by https://www.distractify.com/p/fitness-dating-app), so in this paper we will pursue the idea of a correlation between drug use and overall well-being.
Data
The data referenced in this project was collected on 06/30/2012. The data was scraped directly from www.okcupid.com with a sample size of 1500 users in San Francisco.
Our primary variable that we’ll be observing is drugs, which is a categorical variable describing how often an OkCupid user uses drugs (never, null, often, sometimes). The most common answer is “never” with 961 users and the least common answer is “often” with 20 users.
Our research question (see in the next section) concerns quite a few more variables related to the variable drugs. These variables include drinks, body type, and income. The variable drinks is another categorical variable describing how often a user drinks (desperately, not at all, often, rarely, socially, very often). The most common answer is “socially” with 1036 users and the least common answer is “desperately” with 7 users. The variable body type is also a categorical variable describing a person’s physical state (a little extra, athletic, average, curvy, fit, full figured, jacked). “Average” makes up 27% of all users with 0.4% of all users preferring not to answer. Our final variable income is quantitative and describes the yearly income of a user. The median income of OkCupid users is $50,000 with a standard deviation of $195,775.
The figure below visualizes income levels among the entire sample population
The following figure tabulates the varying levels of drug use.
Most users don’t use drugs with a proportion of 0.641, some users have no response with a proportion of 0.139, extreme users have a proportion of 0.013, and moderate users have a proportion of 0.207. We will explore how these proportions relate to the other variables discussed in the following sections.
Does Drug Avoidance Entail A More Fit Body?
This research questions explores if there is a significant relationship between drug use and physical well-being.
Preamble: We define physical wellness being a body type of “athletic”, “average”, “fit”, “jacked”. We will define deviating from physical wellness as all other body types.
To visualize what drug usage attributes to each body type, we observe the bar graph below. The x-axis describes body type and y-axis describes the amount of users attributing to “never” (green) “sometimes” (orange), “often” (red), and “no answer” (blue).
We observe from fig. 1 that all physically well groups besides “jacked” have the greatest amount of users who “never” used drugs, with 185 being “fit”, "201 being “athletic” and 267 being “average”. We notice “jacked” is an outlier with only 7 non drug users. We observe that people deviating from physical wellness have far fewer people identifying with “never” using drugs, e.g., “overweight” with 20 and “a little extra” with 71.
We could suggest that physically well people stray away from drug use more than those deviating from physical wellness.
Further summarization of the data shows 64% of all OKCupid users “never” used drugs while only 1.3% “often” use drugs. Out of all physically well people, 66% classify as non drug users.
Now we’ll create a formal hypothesis. Using the fact that we observed a large amount of physically well people “never” used drugs (66%), we form the hypotheses:
A one-sample proportion test of the drug use being “never” returns a p-value of 0 and a 95% confidence interval of 0.6154 to 0.666. Note that np >= 10 and n(1-p) >= 10 for groups of drug use tested, so the test is valid.
Because p < 0.05, there’s not significant evidence to reject the null hypothesis. In the context of the data, it is reasonable to say that a lack of drug use is seen in physically well people.
Does Drug Avoidance Indicate Average/Higher Income?
This research question explores whether or not drug use is an indicator of income.
Preamble: We define lower income as being under the median income of the sample, which we define below.
To visualize drug use in correlation with lower income, we observe the box plots below. For context, the median salary of all OkCupid users is $50,000.
From this data we may suggest that lack of drug use attributes to an income at or higher than the median of all salaries. We can formally test our research question of whether drug avoidance indicates at or above median income with an ANOVA test. The ANOVA test is valid because n >= 30 for all groups of drug use tested.
The ANOVA test returns an F-score of 25.4705 and a P-value of 0 < 0.05. Therefore, there is not significant evidence to reject the null hypothesis. In the context of the data, we see that there is not a reasonable difference in income between different levels of drug use.
Is There A Relationship Between Drug And Alcohol Use?
Although alcohol is a drug in itself, it gets its own category on an OkCupid profile from drug use. That begs the question if there is a relationship between alcohol usage and other drug usage.
We observe the following contingency table to view relationships between varying levels of drug use and alcohol use.
We can draw observations from fig. 3 like that non drug users have the highest proportion of “social” drinkers with a proportion of 0.439, whereas “often” drug users have a proportion of “social” drinkers of only 0.005. Conversely, people who drink “not at all” have a proportion of “never” drug users of 0.057 and a proportion of “often” drug users of only 0.001.
It seems from the data that people who don’t use drugs use drinking as a substitute, whereas people who don’t drink don’t bother doing drugs as a substitute at all. We can form our formal hypothesis from this idea as well as choose a test.
To test the research question, we can perform a Pearson’s Chi-squared test. The test is valid because all groups tested have an np >= 10 and n(1-p) >= 10.
The Chi-squared test returns an X-squared value of 158.35 and a p-value < 2.2e-16 < 0.05. We therefore fail to reject the null hypothesis. In the context of the data, there is not a significant relationship between drinking and drug use among OkCupid users.
Discussion
This report observed profile information like physical fitness and income among OkCupid users and how it relates to drug use. The data used for this report was scraped from the OkCupid site and was sampled from 1500 San Francisco users.
We found that there is a significant relationship between drug use and physical fitness, where a lack of drug use does have a significant relationship with physical well-being. However, our study was limited in that we could not find a casual relationship between the two. In the future, we can perform experimental research by picking out groups of people to do and not to drugs for a set period of time and tracking the difference in their physical well-being before and after the experiment.
The last two research questions ended with a lack of significant relationship being found. We could not find a significant relationship between income level and drug use. Our inference may be lacking in that it was not specific enough about when the wealth/income was obtained versus when drugs were actually in use. In fact there was not enough data in a dating profile to even answer that specific a question.
The final research question concluded that there is not a significant relationship between drinking and drug use. We can actually see social normalization of alcohol versus other drugs like marijuana when trying to form this conclusion. OkCupid provides only 4 objective options to how much a person uses drugs whereas for drinking habits, offers more subjective options like “socially” and “desperately”, as if those attributes could not be applied to marijuana use (they can). Modern normalization of alcohol makes the final research question harder to produce an unbiased answer for. Perhaps a more directed study toward alcohol and drug use is required to produce a faithful conclusion rather than information from a dating site.
Overall, our analyses provide great insight into not just our research questions, but future research that can find useful relationships between drug use and other important factors of life, like income and substance usage.
