Introduction:
Managers and coaches for international teams are constantly looking to evaluate playing time amongst their players and how their teams are performing in order to constantly improve. In order to gain a better idea of how playing time is distributed during matches so that players can get time on the field, the 2010 World Cup will be evaluated. By understanding the playing time of players, we can get a better idea of how playing time is distributed amongst the team as well as how it can affect the match. This research report hopes to address how playing time is distributed during tournaments and how it may affect the game.
Data:
For this analysis, a sample of all 595 players from the 2010 FIFA World Cup was collected by Opta, a company that collects and offers data on a variety of sports all around the globe. The collected data on player performances was published by the Guardian before the final (https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2010/jul/09/world-cup-2010-statistics).
The main variable of the study is playtime. It is a quantitative variable measuring the number of minutes each player was on the field. The mean playtime was 208.864 minutes, with a standard deviation of about 145.434.
Other variables of this study include total passes and position. Total passes is another quantitative variable measuring the total number of passes made by a player during the World Cup. The mean number of total passes was 84.521 passes, with a standard deviation of about 77.31.
The variable position is a categorical variable that represents the position (role) of the player: there are 4 broad categories that players were put into (Goalkeeper, Defender, Midfielder, Forward). In this World Cup, the most popular position was Midfielder, being 228 (or 38%) of the 595 players. Goalkeepers were the least popular position, only being 36 (or 6%) of the 595 players.
Research Scenarios:
Question 1. Is the true mean playing time greater than 200 minutes?
To better understand the playing time of players, we will perform exploratory analysis by examining the distribution of playing time in the 2010 World Cup. When looking at Figure 1 from the Data section, it can be seen that there is a lot of variance in playtime. A majority of players seem to have playing times of 249 minutes or less, but there are spikes of players with 250-299 minutes and 350-399 minutes of playing time. This may be due to players that continued further on into the tournament and got to play more games. It may also be a cause of goalkeepers (they tend to play the whole match all the time).
To continue, the distribution of PlayingTime appears to be bimodal (modes at 0-49 and 250-299 minutes), right-skewed, and contains a few possible outliers at 350-399 and 500-549 minutes.
From the distribution, it can be seen that there are many players above the average playing time of 208.864 minutes. With this information, these hypotheses will be examined:
In order to test these hypotheses, we will run a one-sample mean t-test. We must run this test because the sigma is unknown for the population. Moreover, the sample size (n = 595) is relatively large and greater than 30, indicating that the distribution is robust against minor violations. Specifically, the large sample size makes it so that the t-distribution is indifferent from Normal. After running this test, we find that the test statistic is t = 1.4867 and the p-value is 0.0688. Since the p-value is not less than alpha significance levels 0.05 or 0.01, we do not reject the Null hypothesis. In context, we have sufficient evidence to conclude that the true mean playing time is not greater than 200 minutes.
Question 2. Is there a linear relationship between playing time and total passes?
We hope to investigate if there is an association between playing time and total passes. Since a greater playing time indicates that a player is on the field for a longer duration of time, it can be reasonable to assume that more time on the field can lead to more passes being made. However, this may not always be the case. Certain positions like the goalkeeper may not be making more passes just due to more time. However, we suspect that defenders, midfielders, and forwards pass more with more time played.
When examining the scatterplot, the right-skewedness of TotalPasses is evident. We notice this with the heavy concentration of little passes made but then there are fewer numbers of many passes made. We can also notice the right skewedness of PlayTime as there are less and less plots as the x-axis increases. The relationship between PlayTime and TotalPasses is relatively linear and the spread of the data is reasonably consistent (as shown with the linear regression model). Furthermore, the Pearson correlation coefficient of 0.815 is closer to 1, suggesting a more linear shape rather than a cloud-like shape. This allows us to assume that knowing one variable helps in predicting the other.
Estimated Total Passes = -5.98 + 0.43 * PlayTime
The slope of 0.43 for the PlayTime indicates that for each additional minute of playing time, we estimate an additional half of a pass made for the player.
We are aware that the data is fairly linear but will test for the regression slope. Since we assume that more playing time equates to more passes made, we will test for an alternative hypothesis that is greater than 0:
After performing the significance test, the p-value is about very close to 0, which is less than any alpha significance level and can therefore reject the Null hypothesis. This allows us to conclude that we have sufficient evidence that there is a positive linear relationship between PlayingTime and TotalPasses made.
Since there are 4 different main positions within soccer, we are interested in the distribution among the different positions. We hypothesize that there may be different amounts of playing time dependent on position due to player availability and substitutions that can be made during the game.
From this table, it can be seen that there is variability within the playing time for different positions. Midfielder and defender positions seem to have the highest mean playing time, whereas forwards seem to have a little lower of a playing time and goalkeepers have an extremely low playing time. The great range of variability can be further examined through a boxplot diagram.
The median of playing time for goalkeepers is higher than the median for other positions, but goalkeepers did have the lowest average playing time. The goalkeeper position has a few low outliers, which may explain the low value. The defender, midfielder, and forward positions had similar spreads, but defenders had a higher median. This may be due to the lack of substitutions for defenders during a game. To determine if different positions affect the playing time, an analysis of variance test can be performed.
The ANOVA test is justifiable since the group sample sizes are relatively large (the smallest population is 36 > 30). Moreover, we can say that the population standard deviations are about the same by comparing the sample standard deviation ([144.324 / 134.886] < 2). After performing the test, an F-score of 15.7301 and p-value of about 0 is found. Since the p-value (about 0) is less than any significant alpha value, we can reject the Null hypotheses. In context, we do not have sufficient evidence that player position does affect playing time.
Discussion:
The analysis on playing time of the 595 players from the 2010 FIFA World Cup gave more insight into how positions affect playing time, the amount of passes made, and how playing time is distributed amongst players. We found that World Cup players tend to have an average playing time of about 200 minutes. However, we did not find enough evidence to determine that position affects the amount of time on the field that a player is given. Moving on, we did find an association between playing time and the total passes made. This may help coaches understand that more playing time for their players may bring more passes amongst the team. Some limitations in this data is that we do not know more about the team sizes. Knowing team sizes can greatly affect the number of substitutions that can be made, which affects playing time. Another possible piece of data that can be included are the playing times of previous World Cups, in order to get a better idea of how each World Cup may vary.
Overall, this analysis shows how playing time is distributed amongst players in the World Cup and can give a better idea to coaches of how playing time can affect games (particularly passes being made).
