One of the most watched and anticipated sporting events around the world is the World Cup. Every four years, soccer teams from countries all over the world come together to play a soccer tournament to determine what country has the best soccer team in the world. During the World Cup, all the attention is on the star world class players like Lionel Messi and Cristiano Ronaldo, who play all the minutes in every game drawing the attention from every viewer all over the world. With all the attention on star players, many of the players on the teams go unnoticed, even though they’re playing a lot of minutes in many games during the World Cup. Our goal in this report is to look into how often all players in the World Cup actually play/participate and how much do these players get their teammates involved in games during the World Cup, not just looking at the star players, and also investigate whether there are other factors that affect the playing time and total passes of players in the World Cup.
For our report, the data set we will be utilizing for analysis is a variety of data on the player performance in the 2010 World Cup that was held in South Africa. The data was gathered by Opta, a company which gathers data on sports all over the world, and this data consists of multiple variables pertaining to the 595 players that participated in the 2010 World Cup.
Our primary focus in this report will be on the variable of Playtime, a quantitative variable measuring the time on the field each player spent during the world Cup (in minutes). The mean playtime was 208.864 minutes with a standard deviation of 145.434 minutes.
Our research questions for this report(included in the next section), will also contain the variables of position and total passes.
Position is a categorical variable indicating what position a certain player plays. The position with the most amount players was Midfielder with 228 players, and the position with the least amount of players was Goalkeeper with 36 players.
Total passes is a quantitative variable indicating how many passes each player made during the World Cup. The average total passes was 84.521 passes with a standard deviation of 77.310 passes.
Research Question 1: Is the mean playing time less than 200 minutes?
To better understand the variable of playtime and form our hypothesis test, we will analyze the distribution of playtime in the 2010 World Cup. In the histogram below, we see that most players don’t have a lot of playtime in the World Cup, with most the time being below 200 minutes. This could be due to much of the roster on these teams are on the bench and don’t start the games, but then get subbed into the game near the end of the game, while a smaller number of star players actually play for the entire game.
The distribution of Playtime is relatively unimodal, with the primary mode being around 0 to 100 minutes. The distribution is also slightly skewed to the right, with a couple irregular jumps in the number of players with high playing times at 250 to 299 minutes and 350 to 399 minutes. There are no potential outliers in this distribution.
Now that we have analyzed the variable, we can now state our hypothesis. Since we have anecdotal/visual evidence that playtime is not a lot for most players, being less than 200 minutes, we well test the follow hypotheses:
MU is the average playtime of players in the 2010 world Cup in minutes.
To test these hypothesis, we run a one sample z-test. Since the playtime data is continuous, the data follows a normal distribution since the size of the sample of players is greater than or equal to 30, the players can be picked at random, and the population standard deviation is known, the z test is justifiable to use. With the z test we get a test statistic of z=1.4867, and the the p value of this statistic is 0.9314, which is nearly 1. Since the p value is nearly 1, that in turn means for all our reasonable alpha significance levels, we do not reject the null hypothesis. In context, this means we do not find sufficient evidence that the average playtime of players in the 2010 world cup is less than 200 minutes.
Our next research question is to look into whether mean playtime of players is associated with the position of the player.
Since it is likely that different positions of players cause players to have different playtimes, it seems relatively sensible to hypothesize that there will be different mean playtimes based on the position a player plays.
We will first analyze playtime by each of the positions played, and this analysis is shown in the table below.
From the table above we are able to see that there is a decent amount of variation of the playtime across the different positions. Goalkeeper seems to have the most playtime while Midfielder and Forward seem to have the least amount of playtime.
Next, we will analyze the playtime of players by position graphically with side by side box plots, seen in the box plots below:
To formally test the question of whether mean playtime differs by position, we will use ANOVA (analysis of variance). We use ANOVA with the null hypothesis that the mean playtime is the same across all positions, hence we will test the hypotheses:
MU is the true mean playtime for each of the positions.
Also, we can use the ANOVA test in this case because since the group sizes( number of players at each position) are relatively large, i.e. greater than 30, with the smallest group size being 36. Also the data was gathered using randomization and the standard deviations are within a factor of 2. So the use of ANOVA is justified.
When we run ANOVA, the test outputs a test statistic of F= 15.7301, with a corresponding p value of 0. Since the P value is 0, this is less than any reasonable significance level, which means we reject the null hypothesis and conclude that there is sufficient evidence that the mean playtime in the World Cup differs by position.
Our next research question is to look into whether mean total passes of players is associated with the position of the player.
Since it is likely that different positions of players cause the players to have different roles on the field, i.e some positions pass the ball more than others, it seems relatively sensible to hypothesize that there will be different mean total passes based on the position a player plays.
We will first analyze total passes by each of the positions played, and this analysis is shown in the table below.
From the table above we are able to see that there is a decent amount of variation of total passes across the different positions. Defender seems to have the most total passes while Goalkeeper and Forward seem to have the least amount of total passes.
Next, we will analyze the total passes of players by position graphically with side by side box plots, seen in the box plots below:
To formally test the question of whether mean total passes differs by position, we will use ANOVA (analysis of variance). We use ANOVA with the null hypothesis that the mean total passes is the same across all positions, hence we will test the hypotheses:
MU is the true mean total passes for each of the positions.
Also, we can use the ANOVA test in this case because since the group sizes( number of players at each position) are relatively large, i.e. greater than 30, with the smallest group size being 36. Furthermore, the data was gathered using randomization and the standard deviations are relatively within a factor of 2. Thus, the use of ANOVA is justified.
When we run ANOVA, the test outputs a test statistic of F= 16.8992, with a corresponding p value of 0. Since the P value is 0, this is less than any reasonable significance level, which means we reject the null hypothesis and conclude that there is sufficient evidence that the mean total passes in the World Cup differs by position.
In this report, our analysis mainly focused on the playing time of 595 players who participated in the 2010 World Cup. We first examined what the true mean playing time of majority of the players was, and then we examined the potential relationships between position and playing time, and position and total passes. Overall, we discovered that players have a large range of playtime, with majority of the playtime being from 0 to 300 minutes. We found that there is a strong relationship between position and playtime, due to each position having varying means of playing times. Moreover, we found that there is a strong relationship between position and total passes, due to varying means of total passes based on the position being played.
Further analysis could be conducted with the variable of Team as well, to investigate whether there is a relationship between Team and playtime, and team and total passes. We could expect these variables to vary based on the different coaching styles of each team.
Some limitations to our report is the limited amount of data to analyze. It’s hard to make concrete conclusions about the World Cup in general with analysis of data only from the 2010 World Cup. But with more data from multiple World Cups, the analysis and conclusions can be more reasonably generalized to the World Cup in general.
Overall, our analysis can help viewers and fans of soccers better understand the game of soccer during the world cup. Like how long is a player on the field on average during the World Cup, how often each position is supposed to pass the ball on average in the World Cup, and how much time each position is supposed to play on average in the World Cup.
