Introduction:
In the modern world, the internet serves as an international coordinate which many can use to learn, discuss, and grow. Discussion Forums are spaces online in which many internet users can reflect and discuss on a topic to learn more and to criticize. While these resources are very useful, the internet is oversaturated with discussion forums and posts. There must be an algorithm to organize which discussion forums are listed first ranking in them by usefulness. Our goal in the current work is to see which traits and specifics attract more visitors to a discussion forum. This work may be of help by assisting how we rank and promote discussion forums.
Dataset:
The data used in this project comes from a website titled ScienceForums.Net (SFN). ScienceForums contains discussion forums on a wide range of topics ranging from biological and physical science to religion and philosophy. SFN collected the following data, highlighting variables which differ within discussion forums, from a large compilation of threads within their website.
Our primary focus will be on the variable views, a quantitative variable measuring the total number of views a thread has. This is a continuous variable and will simply be measured by count.
Our research questions [stated in the next section] will also include posts, age, and forum.
The variable posts is a quantitative variable which measures the number of posts in a thread. The median number of posts is 7.00.
Research Scenarios:
Question 1: Does the number of posts in a thread affect the view count?
Our first hypothesis will involve the relationship between the posts on a thread and the view count. More posts on a thread may be related to more content and interesting material to read through.
To understand the variable and to motivate the hypothesis test, we first explore and summarize the distribution of posts in relation to views. In the scatterplot (below), we see that views seems to grow with posts. (We could postulate that views simply are higher with posts, since more posts can only come from a thread with a higher view count and interaction rate already).
The scatterplot depicting views vs. posts demonstrates a positive and linear correlation. There is a clear growth in views alongside posts. The regression equation also suggests that each post results in 44.47 views. As shown in the graph, the regression equation is:
Having summarized the variable, we now turn to the formal hypotheses. Since we have anecdotal evidence that more posts in a thread lead to a higher view count, we will test the following hypotheses:
Upon testing this hypothesis, there was a p-value of nearly 0. Since this p-value of 0 is less than 0.05, we can reject our null hypothesis. We have a 95% confidence interval of [0.3805,1]. It is then determined by significance test that we have enough evidence of an upward, positive slope between posts and views.
Question 2: Does the age of a thread affect the count of views?
Our next research question is to investigate whether the age of a thread in SFN is associated with the view count.
If a thread is recently posted, it has a much smaller timeframe to receive a higher count of views or activity to promote it. It seems reasonable to hypothesize that there might be a positive slope in regard to views vs. age, as threads which have been around longer may have a better opportunity to receive views.
To understand the variables in the context and motivate the hypothesis test, we will explore the distribution of views vs. age to find a relationship. In the scatterplot (below), we struggle to notice any relationship or trend which can elaborate as to how age affects views.
Having summarized the variable, we now turn to the formal hypothesis test. We will test the following hypothesis in the slope’s significance test:
Upon running this test, we get a p-value of 0. As the p-value is less than 0.05, we reject our null hypothesis and conclude there is a significant effect. We have a 95% confidence interval of [0.0684,1]. Age seems to affect view count within the SFN threads used within our study.
Question 3: Does the forum in which a thread belongs to affect view count?
Our final research question is to investigate whether the forum in which a thread is posted affects the view count.
There is a wide range of forums within the SFN website. Ranging from science to simply discussion and misc. As the website is science-themed, it seems reasonable to hypothesize that threads posted under the science forum will have a higher view count.
To understand the variables, we will observe the box-plot shown below measuring the views given forum.
Having summarized the variable, we now use ANOVA with the null hypothesis that there is a generally similar view count across the varying forums. The following hypothesis is tested:
Upon running the tests, we get a test statistic of F = 6.12. We similarly get a p-value of 0, which is smaller than 0.05. Therefore, we do not reject the null hypothesis and notice that there is a similar view count among the varying forums, despite how much they differ.
Discussion:
In this project, we examine how different traits within a discussion forum affect the view count and success. The data was collected from ScienceForums.Net and used samples ranging from 2002-2014. We can conclude that the more posts a thread has, the more views it will generally have. This is probably due to the fact that more posts means more interaction and content to visit. We can also conclude that the age of a thread has a positive slope with view count. This is probable as the longer a thread has been posted, there is more time for it to reach a larger audience. We finally concluded that there would be a similar view count across varying forums within SFN. This is as many discussion forums receive many varying visitors to learn of many differing topics. This study can be used by SFN, to understand what makes threads worth visiting so they can enhance how they promote such threads and increase online engagement.
