Introduction
With the newest advancements in technology today, socializing online has become easier than ever. Dating apps such as OkCupid has helped people find friends and soulmates all over the world. While anyone above the age of 18 can create an account, each profile is unique and everyone will encounter different experiences. As a result, researchers are interested in investigating some of the characteristics displayed in a user’s profile to get a better understanding of OkCupid’s user population. This examination may provide useful demographics to the company that could help them update their online dating services to improve user experiences.
Data
The original data was a volunteered sample that consisted of 59946 users within a 25 mile radius of San Francisco, who had active accounts on 06/06/2012. However the data used in this investigation was created by a python script that gathered data from public profiles on the company’s website, www.ok.cupid.com that consisted of 1500 active users on 06/30/2012. Permission was obtained from OkCupid president and co-founder Christian Rudder to use this data under the condition that the dataset remains public.
In our investigation, we will focus on the status variable, which is a categorical variable categorizing the relationship status of the user into: single, seeing someone, married, or available (in an open relationship). Data shows that 90.9% (1364/1500) users were single, 4.47% (67/1500) were seeing someone, 4.13% (62/1500) were available, 0.4% (6/1500) were married, and 0.0667% (1/1500) were unknown (as shown in Figure 1). Other variables we will investigate in relation to status are age, height, and sex. Age is a quantitative variable that measures the user’s age in years. As shown in Figure 2, the histogram that displays the distributions of the users’ age is unimodal and skewed right. Data generated from the histogram in Table 1 shows that the average age is close to 33 years old with a standard deviation of almost 10 years. Height is a quantitative variable that characterizes users’ heights in inches. Figure 3 shows the distribution of user heights in a histogram. The distribution is unimodal and symmetric. The average and median height in the sample is approximately 69 inches with a standard deviation of 3.8 inches (shown in Table 2). Sex is a categorical variable that characterizes users’ sex into male or female. As shown in Figure 4, 74.3% (1115/1500) of users are male and 25.7% (385/1500) are female.
The first research question will examine if a relationship exists between the relationship status and users’ age. We hypothesize that status could indicate a user’s age or equivalently that there is a relationship between age and status. Let muS, muSS, muA, muM denote the average age of the users who are single, seeing someone, available, or are married. Our formal hypotheses are
To get a basic visual representation of the data, we created a box plot comparing the distribution of age across the 4 groups of status (shown in Figure 5). We can see that people who are single, seeing someone, or available are mostly younger adults around with a median age of 30 years old while those who are married have a median age of 40 years old. This suggests a possible association between these two variables.
Since the conditions are mostly satisfied, we decide to proceed with the ANOVA test at the 0.05 significance level. After performing the test, we get a test statistic of F = 1.9935 and a p-value = 0.0931. Since our p-value of 0.0931 is greater than 0.05, we fail to reject the null hypothesis that the means are equal. There is no sufficient evidence to conclude that there is an association between status and age.
Relationship between Status and Height
Our next research question examine if there is a relationship between relationship status and height. We hypothesize that status could indicate a user’s height or equivalently that there is a relationship between status and height. Let muS, muSS, muA, muM denote the average height of the users who are single, seeing someone, available, or are married. Our formal hypotheses are
To get a basic visual representation of the data, we created a box plot comparing the distribution of height across the 4 groups of status (shown in Figure 6). We can see that people who are single, seeing someone, available , or married mostly have a height around 70 inches. Those who are single have the greatest range in height while those who are married have the smallest. This suggests a possible association between these two variables.
Since the conditions are mostly satisfied, we choose to proceed with the ANOVA test at the 0.05 significance level. After performing the test, we get a test statistic of F = 1.5733 and a p-value = 0.1789. Since our p-value of 0.1789 is greater than 0.05, we fail to reject the null hypothesis. There is no sufficient evidence to conclude that there is an association between relationship status and height of users.
Relationship between Sex and Status
Our last research question will investigate if there is a relationship between sex and relationship status. To get a preliminary understanding of our data, we created a contingency table between sex and status (shown in Table 5). We can see that the greatest difference between female and male is 0.031 in the seeing someone status. Overall, there is a slightly greater proportion of males across single and available status categories than female, which indicates an association. Our formal hypotheses are
Null hypothesis: There is no association between sex and status.
Alternative hypothesis: There is an association between sex and status.
Since we have a categorical explanatory variable (sex) and categorical response variable (status), we can conduct a chi-square test. The conditions for inference are mostly satisfied as our data is randomly pulled by the computer with a sample size greater than 30. The only caveat lies in the condition of justifying the shape of the chi-square distribution in which each expected count as to be at least 5. Our smallest expected cell count is 3.08 (0.008x385) and 4.46 (0.003x1115) between male and female in the married group. We thought it would be inappropriate to combine it with any other group as being married is usually not indicative that they are open to be engaging in another relationship. As a result, we decided to accept it as the condition of 5 is only slightly violated and proceed with the chi-square test.
After performing the test, we get a p-value = 0.0152. Since our p-value is less than 0.05, we reject the null hypothesis. There is sufficient evidence to conclude that there is an association between sex and relationship status of users.
Discussion
Our investigation looked at three different variables of age, height, and sex and their relation to status. Our tests indicated an association between sex and status but no association between status and age or height. However, it is important to note that the conclusion from chi-square test do not explain the cause of one variable on another and merely indicates an association between sex and status.
A limitation to our study was that there was some conditions that were not able to be satisfied due to the grouping of our data. We could improve this by further organizing the data into larger bins so that they are less sparsed out. Another limitation is that the raw data includes unknown variables that is not taken in account in some of the tests, which an alter our results. To address this, the raw data should be organized into groups that would be reflected in the tests whether that is completely omitting the unknown data or creating another variable for it. In addition, it is important to note that the results in our tests only indicate an association between age, height, or sex and status. It does not explain the cause of the one variable on another. Future examinations can characterize other variables such as personalities and hobbies, which could help OkCupid develop features that would increase the chances of people finding someone with similar interests and personalities as them.
