With the global movement towards digitization, from mundane activities to more complex social interactions, online dating has become a mainstay in society. Therefore, a more thorough understanding of who engages in online dating and how they construct their respective profile, is something important to be addressed. Additionally, with the emphasis on financial status, a specific subliminal importance lies within the metric of income in comparison to more qualitative measures (as reported in Forbes: https://www.forbes.com/sites/learnvest/2014/06/19/should-you-keep-your-salary-secret-when-online-dating/?sh=4c718d338ea8). This emphasis on income calls on the frequency of matches, increase in profile interest, and personal expectations for a potential date (as specified on money.com: https://money.com/online-dating-income/). The goal of this work is to understand the nuances of income on dating profiles in their totality. This work hopes to provide context to the formulation of a dating profile through the lens of one’s income.
This study is primarily focused on the variable of income which is a quantitative variable that measures the money earned by each individual in the data set (measured in United States Dollars). The mean income for this data set is $102,340.00 and the standard deviation of income is $195,774.25.
The research questions, introduced in the subsequent section, will mention the variables, education and age. The variable of education is a categorical variable which explores the options of having dropped out of, working on, or graduated from high school, two-year college, university, masters program, law school, med school, Ph.D program, and space camp. As this leads to 24 different categories for this variable, it was pertinent to strategically refine the dataset in order to create a more digestible understanding of the educational status of each participant. The resulting three categories are College/University (for those currently working on or having received a college or university degree or have dropped out of a masters or PhD program as that indicates previously graduating from college or university), Masters/PhD (for those currently working on or completed their masters or PhD), and High School/Dropout (for those currently pursuing a high school diploma or have dropped out of college as that indicates them having received a high school diploma, or have dropped out of high school). Additionally, the High School/Dropout category includes those who are affiliated with space camp in any way as, according to www.spacecamp.com, graduating from space camp is not a recognized certification for higher education.
The variable age is a quantitative variable that measures the age in years of those in the data set. The mean age is 32.974 years or 32 years and 356 days where the standard deviation is 9.932 years or 9 years and 340 days.
Question 1: How heavily does education predict mean income specifically within people using OkCupid?
The initial hypothesis we will discuss is if mean income is associated with education. However, as explained in the New York Times (https://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/11/business/economy/a-simple-equation-more-education-more-income.html) more education is widely known to lead to a higher income. Therefore, this is a replication of this evidence on the data set provided in regards to dating apps, most specifically for OkCupid.
With the younger age of the majority of dating app users, and the average age of users being around 32 years, a significant portion of the users lie in their twenties which traditionally means they are currently pursuing a college/university or masters/PhD degree and still not having embraced the benefits of carrying a higher education degree. This leads to us justifiably hypothesizing that higher education will lead to a higher income.
The initial summarization of the data will be in regards to the mean and standard deviation values of each of the categories for education as divided in the previous section:
From the above table, it is possible to see that the mean income for College/University is the lowest as they are the most heavily invested as students solely, followed by High School/Dropout (which includes those affiliated with Space Camp), and finally the most educated in the Masters/PhD category.
This relationship between education and mean income is graphically represented in the below side by side box plots:
This comparison shows that even with varying means, the categories share related interquartile ranges with quarter 1 lying at $20,000 for all three categories, and there exists a shared outlier in the 1 million dollar area for all three categories as well.
However, to formally test the question, the analysis of variance or ANOVA method is employed with a null hypothesis that states that the mean income for all three categories is the same and the alternative hypothesis stating that there is at least one that is not equal:
H0: muCollege/University = muHigh School/Dropout = muMasters/PhD
Ha: At least one of the aforementioned mu’s is not equal to the rest (they are not all equal)
It is important to reinforce the validity of the ANOVA test even with the outliers as there are extremely large group sizes with the lowest being 305 for High Schoolers, Dropouts, and Space Camp Attendees.
The second hypothesis we will discuss concerns the mean income of the dataset. According to an article by the Atlantic (https://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2016/03/tinder-jobs-salary/472611/) which explores the pertinence of earning potential in a dating app match, the average income for men is $73,200 and for women is $61,395. The average of the two, is $67,297.50 and is therefore the measurement to which the mean income of the data set is compared. This research scenario will look to replicate the research done by the Atlantic on the data set of the OkCupid users.
The distribution of the income in this dataset is right skewed with four outliers at the $500,000 - $540,000 bin. Additionally, the average income is $102,340.00 and the standard deviation of income is $195,774.25, which is relatively high, while the median income is $50,000. Following this summarization of the dataset, we discuss the formal hypothesis now. As we have evidence from the Atlantic article that the mean income of users of a dating app such as OkCupid is not $102,340.00, we test the following two hypotheses where mu represents the true income in United States Dollars:
Question 3: Is there a linear relationship between age and income?
The final research question looks at the relationship between age and income and sees if the relationship is linear. As people can only get more education (which has been shown to lead to higher income according to the New York Times in the second research scenario), experience, and overall expertise in a field to garner merit and increase their income as time goes on, age has seemingly a proven linear relationship with income.
Below is the scatterplot and associated linear regression line for the relationship between age and income in accordance to the given OkCupid data:
There is a noticeably horizontal line at y = 33.0824 for the regression and is therefore representative of the lack of relationship between the two variables. The resulting regression equation is:
And the p-value is 0.419 with a statistic at -0.8083 as calculated with a significance level of 0.05.
Ha: beta1 0
Where beta1 is the true slope between age and income in this population of OkCupid users.
With a p-value (0.419) greater than 0.05 which is the significance level, the hypothesis test shows that we should accept the null hypothesis which states that the beta1 or slope is 0 which is reinforced by the scatterplot/linear regression.
This analysis looks at 1,500 users of the dating app, OkCupid, and the relationships between income, age, and education (after transforming and reorganizing this category). We found that the mean income established for dating apps as established by the Atlantic is not true for this dataset and that a higher educational degree leads to higher income in this dataset as explained by the New York Times. Additionally, we did not see a strong correlation between age and income for these OkCupid users. Future research will consider other variables such as institution of education or socioeconomic status taken as a categorical variable.
This analysis will overall allow users of the applications to understand how their potential matches income is influenced by education and age.
