Introduction:
Soccer is the most popular sport in the world, with an impressive 4 billion fans, almost twice as much as the second most popular sport, Cricket (as reported by World Atlas, Oct. 16, 2020: https://www.worldatlas.com/articles/what-are-the-most-popular-sports-in-the-world.html). Due to this enormous popularity, the sport consists of numerous teams that compete for the number one title at the Fifa World Cup. Many teams amass a cult following, large bets are often placed on the teams competing, and extreme pressure is felt by the teams competing to gain the title of the best in the world. In 2010, the World Cup was held in South Africa and the last match was between the Netherlands and Spain. After an intense game, Spain ultimately won and left the Netherlands with their third, second place title (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2010_FIFA_World_Cup). This begs the question of what the Netherlands team has been doing wrong to keep losing the title of the World Champions. There are so many reasons that a team wins over another, some of it being luck, and some of it being the actions of the players and teams during the games and in their practices. Our goal in this study is to understand and determine which factors play a role in scoring points in matches. The findings may be helpful to coaches and teams around the world, looking to become the next world champions or just to win their next match.
Data:
The data used in this study was collected by Opta, a company that gathers data on a multitude of sports worldwide. This data contains the information of all 595 players who appeared in the games before the final.
The primary focus will be on the shots attempted. This is a quantitative variable that measures the number of shots attempted per player. The mean number of shots attempted was 2.304 and the standard deviation was 3.347
Our research questions stated in the next section include additional variables like position and play time. The variable position is a categorical variable that indicates a player’s position on the field. The four positions include: Defender, Forward, Goalkeeper and Midfielder. The most popular position being Midfielder with 38.3% (228 of the total 595), then Defender with 31.6% (188 of the total 595), followed by Forward with 24% (143 of the total 595), and finally Goalkeeper with 6.1% (36 of the total 595).
The variable play time is a quantitative variable that represents the amount of time a player plays in a match (minutes). The mean play time is 208.864 minutes per player and the standard deviation is 145.434 minutes.
Question 1: Is Mean of the number of shots taken less than 3.
The first hypothesis will be about the mean of the variable: Shots Attempted.
To understand the variable, we will explore the distribution of the number of shots attempted. In the histogram shown below, we can observe that most of the players attempt a small number of shots (most being less than 3 shots) and the distribution is skewed right with a primary mode of zero. There are a few outliers at 19, 21, 22, and 27 shots.
We can now turn to the formal hypotheses as we have summarized and explored Shots Attempted. From the histogram above, we can see that the majority of the players take 3 or fewer shots, we can test the following:
Running a one-sample z test for the mean (We do not know the sigma but the sample size is large enough that the t distribution would be almost the same as a normal distribution), the test statistic is z = -5.0703 and the p-value is approximately 0. Since the p-value is less than the generally accepted significance level of alpha, .05, we would reject the null hypothesis. We have sufficient evidence to expect that the true mean of attempted shots is less than 3.
Question 2: Does the position of the player predict the mean number of shots attempted
Our next research question investigates whether the average number of shots has an association with a player’s position.
As established in the data section, there are four positions: Defender, Forward, Goalkeeper, and Midfielder. It can be assumed that the distribution of the number of shots differs depending on the position a player is in as each position is required to perform different actions.
The number of shots attempted by position as shown by the table below.
We can see that there is a distinct variation in the mean attempted shots with the forward having the greatest (4.231), with Midfielder having the second greatest but nearly half of the Forward (2.395), followed by the Defender again with about half the mean as the Midfielder (1.165) and the Goalkeeper having the least (.028).
We can then investigate the relationship between the attempted shots and the position graphically with boxplots:
To formally test the question, we will perform an ANOVA (analysis of variance) with the null hypothesis that the average number of shots attempted is the same across all positions.
We note that the group sizes (number of shots attempted for each group shown in the chart above under the variable “n”) are relatively large, our smallest being 36, belonging to the Goalkeepers group. This means that our ANOVA test is justified despite the outliers and skewness in the box plot.
The ANOVA yields a test statistic of F = 33.3328 and a p-value of approximately 0. The p-value is smaller than any reasonable significance level, so we reject the null hypothesis and conclude that there is sufficient evidence that the average number of attempted shots varies by the position played.
Question 3: Is there a linear relationship between the Shots Attempted and the Play Time
Our last research question investigates whether there is a linear relationship between play time and the number of shots attempted.
When analyzing a player, the number of shots one attempts can be reasonably suspected to be linked to how good of a player they are. A player that is not confident in their abilities will not try and score goals because they will most likely miss. A player’s play time is also largely determined by their skill level. The best players will most likely have the most play time in a match, and will also have more opportunities to attempt to score goals, and will be more confident in attempting shots.
Below is the scatterplot and associated regression line for the relationship between the shots attempted and the playing time of the soccer players:
From the regression equation, we note that the estimated slope is .009389, which means that for each additional minute of play time, we estimate a .009389 increase in the number of shots attempted.
Since we have justified the reasonable linearity of the data, we now will turn to the formal significance test for the regression slope. From this relationship, we can assume that a greater play time results in a greater number of shots attempted, so we will use a one-sided regression test for the slope with an alternative slope being greater than, with the following hypotheses:
Ha: beta1 > 0
After running the hypothesis test, we obtain a p-value of approximately 0. The obtained p-value is lower than the generally accepted level of .05, thus we reject the null hypothesis. From this we conclude that there is sufficient evidence of a positive linear relationship between the number of attempted shots and the play time of the players.
Discussion:
The analysis focused on the number of shots attempted for a sample of 595 soccer players that played in the 2010 World Cup. It determined the potential relationships the play time and position of the players had with the shots attempted. Overall, we found that the majority of players attempted less than 3 shots. We saw a strong relationship between the shots attempted and the position due to the fact that each position plays a different role on the field. It makes sense as the Goalkeeper would not have much of an opportunity to attempt a shot as the rest of the positions. We also saw a positive correlation between the shots attempted and playing time. This relationship was not the strongest, but the players that had the most play time were often the ones with the most attempted shots. This analysis has its limitations, as the data only provided the attempted shots, not the successful ones. If we were provided with the successful shots, it would make the findings more accurate because we could see if these factors actually contributed to the team winning. We could also compare the number of attempted shots to the number of successful shots to see if the players that attempted the most were actually the most useful to the team. We might also benefit from obtaining training hours of the players before the World Cup, to help the teams and coaches understand how to improve.
Overall, our analysis can help both players and coaches understand what factors during a game result in the success of the team and how they can improve in the future.
