Introduction
Prolonging mortality is a goal much of humanity has. Although immortality may be out of reach with present technologies, this has not stopped billionaire Preston Jorgensen's interest in finding ways to extend his life. He has tasked us with examaning pollutants that are most strongly associated with increased deaths in the hopes of reducing this pollutant or set of pollutants to further his lifespan. Specifically, Jorgensen tasked us with finding evidence of whether pollutants are associated with increased deaths at all and, if so, identifying the pollutants that are most associated with increased deaths. He also tasked us with finding out whether the effects of pollutants impact deaths immediately or if there is more of a lingering effect where pollutant level impact deaths over several days. Lastly, Jorgensen was interested in the average death rate for a 70 degree day (farenheit) if pollutants were reduced to the lowest levels ever recorded. He wants to know whether the estimated impact of reducing pollution concentration on the average death rate is worth substantial investment in efforts to mitigate pollution levels. (1) To help answer these questions, we are using a subset of air quality measurements in Chicago, Illinois from January 1987 to December 2000. We filtered observations in this dataset to exclude days with missing data for any variables (including lagged variables). Our subset of data contains 4,012 observations of air quality, temperature, and non-accidental death measurements in Chicago from 1987 to 2000. Note that later on in our exploratory data analysis we decide to exclude a series of outliers from our data (1995 Chicago Heat Wave) resulting in a new total of 4007 observations for the remainder of the paper. Specifically, the variables included in this dataset are the day of the obervation, the number of non-accidental deaths each day, the mean temperature (farenheit), the median concentration of ozone (parts per billion), median concentration of sulfur dioxide (parts per billion), and the median concentration of particulate matter with a diameter less than 10 micrometers (PM10; $mg/m^3$). This dataset also includes lagged versions of the pollution and temperature variables which are simply 7 day averages of each respective variable. (2) After evaluating several models and variable characteristics, our research led us to the conclusion that pollutants extended over time have a relationship with mortality. Particularly, the PM10 and ozone concentration polluntants appear to be most associated with mortality. With our observational data on deaths and pollutants in Chicago, we can not extrapolate our findings to other cities and we can not make a causal claim that significantly reducing the pollutant levels to the lowest measures ever recorded will reduce the mean death rate for Chicago on a 70 degree day. Jorgensen is better off spending his fortunes on other more influential factors that can prolong his lifespan such as investing in his personal health and wellbeing. Investment in drastically reducing pollutant levels may be in vain due to regulatory barriers and they may not have a direct effect on mortality. (3)
Exploratory Data Analysis
The key variables we will be exploring will be air pollutants (i.e., PM10, Sulfur Dioxide, Ozone), mean temperature, their 7 day averages (lagged), and non-accidental deaths across the 4,012 observations in the subset of the Chicago air quality dataset. For our analysis, we shifted the pollution variables such that they contain negative values. In reality, these pollutants' concentrations and densities can not be negative. Before we build our models, we must explore the shape and distribution of each variable indivdually. We will start by exploring our predictor variables. In tables 1 and 2, we can see summary statistics for all the daily (table 1) and lagged (table 2) variables in our dataset. These statistics provide means, mediands, and ranges for the data that will be informative when making inferences and building our model. In figures 1, 2, and 3, we can see a histograms and boxplots for the three air pollutants (daily and lagged). The histogram visualizes the distribution of these variables as being skewed right without a normal distribution. The boxplots clearly shows outliers comprised of days with large concentrations of the respective air pollutants. They also visualize that all three pollutant vairables are roughly centered about zero (keeping in mind that they were shifted and zero does not represent their true mean). In figure 3, we can see the histogram and boxplot for mean temperature (daily and lagged) in Chicago from 1987 to 2000. The histogram shows that temperature has a slightly left skewed and non-normal distribution. The boxplot visualizes that there is a single outlier of an extremely cold day in chicago (apporximately -15 degrees) and it shows that temperature is roughly centered about 50 degrees farenheit. (1) Next we will explore our response variable, log of non-accidental deaths. Given that we will be using poisson generalized additive models (GAM), we will examine the log transformation of our death variable. Figure 5 depicts the histogram and boxplot for our response variable. Based on the histogram, we can see that our response is approximately symmetrical and normally distributed. The boxplot clearly visualizes several outliers that are both low values and high values of log of deaths. However, there approximately 5 outliers that are unusually large and that suggest there were a handful of days in Chicago where the number of non-accidental deaths were abnormally large. (2) We will now explore the relationship between our predictors and our response. Figure 6 shows the scatterplots of air pollutants (i.e., pm10, ozone, sulfur dioxide) and temperature against log of accidental deaths. While Figure 7 shows the same relationships but with the lagged predictors. Looking at all eight scatterplots we can see outliers for large values of the log of deaths when plotted against the predictors. It is important to note that these outliers are plotted at zero values for the pm10 and sulfur dioxide pollutants while they are plotted at high values of the ozone pollutant and temperature. This suggests that these outliers may be related to high temperatures and/or high ozone concentration. Other than the outlier, the relationship between the log of deaths and the pollutants appear to be relatively constant with no obvious positive or negative slope. Similarly, the log of deaths appears to be relatively constant across temperatures with possibly a slight negative slope such that the log of deaths decrease as temperature increases. Figure 8 shows us deaths and log of deaths over time (1987 to 2000). Although we are using log of death as our response in our modeling, we belive that including the non-transformed time series can provide valuable and relevant insight to understanding the data. Looking at these time series plots, we can see a seasonal oscillation of deaths and log deaths across time. This can be due to seasonal weather changes that influence both temperature and air pollution levels. Clear outliers we can in both plots are an unusually large amount of deaths in the summer of 1995. Specifically, these outliers can be contributed to the 1995 Chicago Heat Wave. (https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/news/climate-history-july-1995-chicago-area-heat-wave) (https://acp.copernicus.org/articles/16/11601/2016/acp-16-11601-2016.pdf) This event marked five days in 1995, from July 12 to July 16, of record high temperatures and overwhelming humidity which resulted in 739 heat-related deaths. A majority of these deaths were elderly Chicago residents who could not afford air conditioning or were reluctant to open their windows in fear of crime (i.e., home invasion). High levels of heat resulted in air pollutants and humidity being increasingly concentrated in the ground level where they have a more detrimental impact to people's health. High temperatures do not have a large impact on sulfur dioxide and PM10 but it does speed up the chemical processes for ozone air pollutants. Although this event is partially explained by high temperature and ozone levels, our data does not contain information regarding humidity levels which plays a significant role to the 1995 Heat Wave's deadly nature. Therefore, since this event is not appropriately explained by the variables in our data we decided to remove the event from our dataset. Keeping this event in our data would have potentially positvely biased our regression such that predictions for the mean number of deaths would be overestimated. Figure 8 shows the time series of deaths and log deaths from 1987 to 2000 without this event. We can see that the outliers of high numbers of deaths during the summer of 1995 are now gone while the seasonal pattern persists. (3) Figure 10 depicts the time series data for pollutants and temperature in Chicago from 1987 to 2000. (4) An interesting trend in these models is that the ozone and temperature data appears to seasonally osciallating over the years while the sulfur dioxide and pm10 polluntants appear to be relatively constant over time with no distinguishable pattern. This suggest that temperature and ozone levels may be related such that increasing temperatures result in increasing ozone levels. However, when we look at the lagged time series in figure 11 we can see that all pollutants and termperature variables exhbit a seasonal oscillating pattern. This valuable insight suggests that using the 7 day averages of the pollutant concentrations and temperature may better fit the response (log deaths) relative to the daily measured predictors since our response also exhibits seasonal oscillation across time. (5)
Modeling & Diagnostics
We constructed two Poisson generalized additive models with a log link to fit the relationship between deaths, the pollutants, and temperature as well as to answer Jorgensen's questions about pollutants impact on mortality. Our first model (model 1) uses the covariates that provide daily measurements (not lagged) and the second model (model 2) uses the covariates that are calculated using 7 day averages (lagged versions). All the predictors are fit using spline smoothers with 4 degrees of freedom. These models can be seen below. Model 1: $ln(Death_i) = beta_0 + s_{4}(PM10_i) + s_{4}(Ozone_i) + s_{4}(Sulfur Dioxide_i) + s_{4}(Temperature_i)$ Model 2: $ln(Death_i) = beta_0 + s_{4}(Lag:PM10_i) + s_{4}(Lag:Ozone_i) + s_{4}(Lag:Sulfur:Dioxide_i) + s_{4}(Lag:Temperature_i)$ Note that s() denotes a spline smoothing function and the subscript under the s denotes the degrees of freedom (i.e., 4 degrees of freedom). We kept the degrees of freedom at four for all spline smoothing terms for simplicity and speed when conducting our modeling and diagnostics analysis. Since our outcome variable is based on counts, we decided to use a poisson regression in our generalized additive model (GAM) which are commonly used with count reponses. The usual link function for a poisson GAM is log. Therefore, in our model the reponse, deaths, is given a natural log transformation since log and natural log are synonymous in this context. We distinguished the models such that model 1 contains the daily pollutant and temperature covariates and model 2 contains the lagged versions of these variables. We made this distinction so that when we compare which model better fits the data we would be able to analogously answer one of Jorgansen's question and see whether the effects of pollutants on mortality are immediate (model 1) or if they extend over time (model 2). (1) Next in our modeling analysis, we will determine which of these two models best fit the data by calculating each model’s prediction error and standard error using cross-validation techniques. Table 3 depicts the prediction errors and standard errors for the models 1 and 2 which we produced using 5-fold cross-validation. Based on these results, we determined that model 2 (lagged model) provided the best fit for the data since it has the smallest prediction error (0.011542). (2) It is important to note that based on the uncertainty in your estimates of the prediction error the difference between the models' prediction errors does appear to be significant. Such that the difference between the prediction errors of model 1 and 2 (approximately 0.000869) is greater than the standard error of model 2 (0.000347). Although the prediction error difference and model 2 standard error are relatively close and depend on the set of random folds we select, based on our random fold we can confidently say that our lagged model (model 2) is a better fit to the data than our un-lagged model (model 1). For the remainder of our analysis, we will use model 2 since our cross validation techniques determined that it was the better model of the two (3). We must now examine the residual diagnostics of our lagged Poisson GAM to see whether the model assumptions hold. The model assumptions for Poisson GAMs are similar to those of linear models such that they include the errors are normal, homoskedastic, and that the observations are independent. Figure 12 depicts the residual plots and qq plot for our selected model. We plotted the residuals against each predictor in the model along with the fitted values. Based on all five residual plots, the residuals appear to have a random spread approximately centered about zero. However, when plotted against the lagged PM10 and sulfur dioxide concentration, the residuals may be heteroskedastically distributed such that the residuals fan out from the right to the left. This means that residuals are more widely distributed across smaller values of these two pollutants and are more narrowly distributed for larger values of these two pollutants. This is a minor violation of the homoskedasticity assumption. Looking at the qqplot, we can see that the points closely follow the diagonal without any deviations at the tails. This suggests that the residuals are normally distributed. To improve our model to address this minor error of heteroskedasticity we could have used a robust GAM which includes robust standard errors within our spline smoothing functions in the model. Other than this minor deviation, our model met all the assumptions necessary and appears to fit well.
Results
To determine how well our lagged model fits the data we conducted a global goodness-of-fit test. Using the model's deviance and residuals, we calculated the chisquare distribution function and determined the p-value was approximately 0. This suggests that we should reject the null hypothesis that the lagged poisson GAM fits the data well. This is not a surprise given that our predictors (lagged pollutant and temperature data) only encompass a fraction of the many variables that are related with non-accidental deaths (i.e., underlying health conditions, crime levels). (1) Model 3: $ln(Death_i) = beta_0 + s_{4}(Lag:Temperature_i)$ $H_0: s_{4}(Lag:PM10_i) = s_{4}(Lag:Ozone_i) = s_{4}(Lag:Sulfur:Dioxide_i) = s_{4}(Lag:Temperature_i) = 0$ $H_a: H_0 :is: not: true$ Next we must determine whether the pollutants are associated with mortality. To do so, we fit a poisson GAM that only includes the lagged temperature as its feature (Model 3) to compare it against our full lagged GAM with the pollutants and temperature as its features (Model 2) using a hypothesis test. Note that these models were fitted to the same data using the same smoothing parameter selection method (i.e., smoothing spline with 4 degrees of freedom). Our hypothesis test compared the deviance between the between the nested and full model and output that there was a drop in deviance of 97.405 with 12 degrees of freedom and this corresponded with a p-value of 1.792e-15. Given that our p-value is less than 0.01, we can say that we have statistically sufficient evidence at the 1% level to reject the null hypothesis that the lagged pollutants' coefficients missing in the nested model (model 3) compared to the full model (model 2) are not different from zero. This suggests that the lagged air pollutants may very well be associated with mortality and that our model fits the data better when we include these pollutant features in our poisson GAM (2). Based on our cross-validation results in the previous section, we believe that the effect of pollution appears to extend over time. Our cross validation prediction error was lowest with the poisson GAM with lagged pollutants and temperature compared to our model with daily averages (non-lagged). The difference between the two models' prediction errors appeared to be significant given that the difference was greater than the uncertainty in your estimates of the prediction error (i.e., standard error). Therefore, this suggests that a lagged model where pollutant and temperature measurements are 7 day averages fit the data better than our model using daily or instantaneous pollution and temperature estimates (3). To gather evidence to suggest which polluntants appear to be most associated with mortality we plotted the partial response functions showing the average relationship between each variable and the outcome (Figure 13). Note that uncertainty is greater where there are less observations for each respective input variable. Given that the partial response functions for lagged PM10 and ozone show noticeable curvature and slope while that of lagged sulfur dioxide appears more flat with a small slope and less curvature, we have evidence to suggest that the lagged PM10 and ozone variables appear to be most associated with mortality among the pollutants. Lagged temperature also appears to be associated with mortality given the relatively steep slope of its partial repsonse function. (4) These conclusions are consistent with a Wald test of significance for each smooth term in our GAM where we found p-values of 1.08e-07, 3.36e-06, and < 2e-16 for lagged PM10, ozone, and temperature respectively which suggests that we should reject the null hypothesis that these variables do not contribute to the model's fit at a significance level of 1%. The p-value for lagged sulfur dioxide is 0.0242 which suggests that we should fail to reject the null hypothesis at the 1% level. Next we will predict and produce a 95% confidence interval for the mean number of non-accidental deaths on a 70 degree day with the smallest levels of pollutants. The smallest values for lagged PM10, ozone, and sulfur dioxide are -24.12 $mg/m^3$, -18.92 ppb, -4.64 ppb respectively. We are 95% confident the mean number of non-accidental deaths on a 70 degree day with the lowest amount of recorded pollutant levels will be between 105.89 and 112.64 deaths. We also predict that the mean estimate for this value would be 109.21 deaths. (5) To determine which bootstrapping method is appropriate for this data we must refer to our conclusions from examining the residual diagnostics. Given that we identified slight heteroskedasticity and poisson GAM is non-linear, we can not conduct a fully parametric or resampling of residuals bootstrap method. Rather, we should use a resampling of cases approach which only makes the assumption that the response (log of deaths) and predictor (lagged pollutants and temperature) variables are independent and identically distributed random variables. We calculated a 95% pivotal confidence interval for the mean number of non-accidental deaths using 1000 bootstrap iterations. Based on this confidence interval, we are 95% confident that the mean of non-accidental deaths fall between 104.52 to 113.8 on a 70 degree Chicago day with the minimum values of the three pollutants (PM10, SO2, Ozone) in the data. (6) The bootstrapped confidence interval is wider than the confidence interval derived by simply predicting from the model without a bootstrap. This suggests that the uncertainty (i.e., standard error) from the bootstrap is larger than the estimate that relies on the usual linear model assumptions. Therefore, this indicates that one or more of our model assumptions may be violated and based on our analysis of residual diagnostics in the modeling and diagnostics section we can infer that the residuals do not have a constant spread. A heteroskedasticity violation means that our confidence intervals based on our model's standard errors are not reliable. (7)
Conclusions
In this study, we used a poisson GAM with lagged predictors to examine the relationship between mortality and pollutants. Before we delve into the findings, we must preface that all of our findings are purely associative and not causal because are models are based off of observational data. We found that there is evidence that the 7 day averages of pollutants are associated with mortality. Therefore, the relationship of pollution and mortality extends over time rather than being instantaneous. Specifically, the lagged PM10 and ozone concentration variables where the two atmospheric pollutants most associated with mortality while sulfur dioxide has a smaller relationship with mortality. (1) Preston Jorgensen can not conclude that reducing pollutants would cause mortality to decrease to approximately 109 non-accidental deaths per day because our data is not causal and does not hypothesize a causal relationship between mortality and the reduction of air pollutants. Therefore, we do not recommend that Jorgensen should spend his enormous fortune to try to reduce pollution to their lowest levels recorded in the data because we can not assert that pollution has a causal effect on mortality. To prolong his life, Jorgensen's best course of action would be to invest in a healthy lifestyle with proper exercise and diet because investing in reducing city-wide pollution levels in the hopes of reducing mortality is a lofty and uncertain goal. (2) (https://www.cellabox.com/single-post/4-most-dangerous-air-pollutants-in-2017) As for limitations in our analysis, I believe that there are potential confounders unaccounted for in the Chicago pollutants dataset that impact non-accidental deaths. As mentioned earlier, it would have been useful to measure more weather related characteristics other than temperature such as humidity levels. High levels of humidity can cause respitory issues for the elderly and individuals with respitory illnesses (i.e., Asthma) that can lead to health complications such as pneumonia and ultimately death. It would have also been helpful if the dataset contained information on different types of air pollutants that are known to impact health such as nitrogen dioxide and indoor radon. It is possible that the inclusion of these pollutants could have change our model selection, findings, and subsequent recommendations for Jorgenson when it comes to investing in ways to mitigate pollution and reduce mortality. Furthermore, it to have more generalizable data it would be helpful to have observations for more cities in the US other than Chicago (i.e., Miami, New York City, Houston). This would give us better grounds to extrapolate our findings across most if not all US cities. Presently we can not do so because we only have mortality, pollution, and temperature data for Chicago. (3)
