Introduction
Air pollution is one of the major problems that reside in our society, and a problem to tackle onforth. In this study, we are given a data with 5,114 observations and 6 variables of measurements of air quality, number of non-accidental deaths, and mean temperature in Chicago, Illinois from Jan 1987 to Dec 2000.(2) By exploring the dataset, we expect to identify factors, or more specifically pollutants, that are strongly associated with mortality. Furthermore, we will see if the effect of pollution is instantaneous or extends over time. Finally, we will answer Jorgensen's question of whether reducing the pollution by a certain amount would reduce his chance of death, by giving a prediction of death rate with lowest values of pollution.(1) Our study found that there is an association between the pollutants: ozone, particulate matter, and increased mortality.(3)
Exploratory Data Analysis
As briefly mentioned above, our Chicago dataset consists of 5,114 observations with 6 variables. The key variables include the date of observation (time), the number of non-accidental deaths on that date (death), median density of a particular matter with diameter less than 10 micrometers pollution in milligrams per cubic meter (pm10median), median concentration of ozone in parts per billion (o3median), median concentration of sulfur dioxide (so2median), and the mean temperature in farenheit (tmpd). The pollution and temperature variables also have versions that are 7-day averages of the original variables that start with 'lag_', which will help to validate whether pollution effect is instantaneous or extended over time. Prior to exploration, the dataset was removed of NA values, resulting in a reduced number of total rows with 4012 observations. Also, a new variable 'timeasdate' was created that converts the current date variable into a actual date object for easier use. Our response variable in the study will be the number of deaths, with the other key variables as covariates. We will begin by looking at the variables individually. From Figure 1, we can see that the response variable, death, along with the key predictor variables, are all skewed to the right. We can assume that there is going to be a log transformation needed in later regression analysis.(1) Figure 2 is a distribution of the log-applied response variable, death - compared to the previous figure, the distribution seems much more normal, which validates our choice for a log transformation.(2) Figure 3 shows a pairs plot of different predictor variables and the response variable. We can see that there appears to be no definite realationship - an indication that we should employ some type of transformation to the covariates.(3), (5) Plotting the deaths over time shown in Figure 4, we noticed there were some obvious outliers for the number of deaths for July 1995 - the highest number of daily deaths recorded in the dataset were 411, which happened on July 14, 1995. With research, we found that this was the time of the 1995 Chicago Heat Wave, where residents died due to heat-related causes due to abnormally high temperature. However, we decided not to remove these outliers because they are explained by the temperature variable already included in the data.(3)
Modeling & Diagnostics
First and foremost, we begin by fitting two Poission generalized additive models to the data. The first model will include the covariates that are not lagged, and the second model will include the covariates that are lagged (averaged over 7 days). The covariate terms were also all spline smoothed with degrees of freedom 4.(1) To compare the two models, we used a 5-fold cross validation. The mean squared error for model 1 and model 2 were each 201.17 and 189.31.(2) The difference between the models, according to the cross validation output appears to be significant. Because Model 2 had a lower prediction error than Model 1, we will use Model 2 for later analysis.(3)
Results
We then conducted a global goodness of fit test to assess our chosen model. Because the p-values for the covariates were all less than 0.05, we can reject the null hypothesis. The model fits well to the data.(1) To determine whether the pollutants are associated with mortality, we fit a model that uses only temperature as a feature without the pollutant variables - we will compare this model to our best model to validate the association between pollutants and mortality. From the anova test, it appears that there is indeed an association.(2) Based on the cross-validation results in the previous section, we have determined that Model 2 is the best model for the data. Since Model 2 consists of variables that are lagged, we can conclude that the effect of pollution extends over time.(3) Furthermore, we created plots (Figure 5,6,7) for our model to show the average relationship between each predictor variable and the outcome. We noticed that the lag_pm10median pollution variable appear to be most linearly associated with mortality, compared to the others.(4) To answer Jorgensen's last question, we made a prediction for the mean number of deaths and its confidence interval assuming the pollution variables were at their smallest values, on a 70-degree farenheit day. The prediction outcome was 109.51, and the 95% confidence interval for this value was (106.49, 113.13).(5) Moreover, we used non-parametric bootstrapping to assess the 95% confidence interval for the mean number of deaths, given the circumstances described above. The confidence interval reported from this was (107.38, 111.65).(6) The difference between the two confidence intervals appear to be minor.(7)
Conclusions
In this analysis, we used the poisson generalized additive models to examine the relationship between atmospheric pollutants and mortality. We found that the pollutants: ozone and Particulate matter, are strongly associated with increased mortality from the dataset.(1) Also, we delve into Jorgensen's second question: is the effect of pollution instantaneous? The answer was no. Given our results from model analysis, we concluded that the effect of pollution extends over time. Lastly, we examined whether reducing pollutants would cause mortality to decrease. Although our prediction results gave a mean number of deaths that is lower than average, we cannot conclude that the action of reducing pollutants would cause a decrease in mortality because the dataset consisted of observational data.(2) We could not perform a causal analysis because the dataset was observational, setting limitations to the study. Looking at the data and our analysis, I believe a larger sample size would have given us a better and more precise understanding of the relationship between our key variables.(3)
