Introduction
The pursuit of (possibly indefinitely) long life has a legendary history - people have essentially always quested after immortality. Rarely, however, have statistical methods been brought to bear on the issue. With the generous support or Mr Jorgenson, We will investigate the AnAge dataset, an aggregated dataset with information about a variety of animal species (mostly of the Chordata phylum) in order to determine whether we can clearly link some predictors to lifespan when it comes to animals. We will attempt first to predict lifespan based on metabolic rate (adjusted for animal mass), after which we will explore the linearity (or lack thereof) of the relationship, and finally attempt to determine whether reduction in the crab-eating racoon's metabolic rate would permit us to expand the expected lifespan of the racoon in order to provide Mr Jorgenson a longer-lived pet for his pursuit of immortality. We are able to establish a clear link between longevity and metabolic rate (adjusted by mass), but it is crucial to the correct interpretation of this report that we infer no causal implications from this data, which is not experimental.
Exploratory Data Analysis
AnAge Chordata Dataset
The AnAge Database is a database aggregated from scientific papers that maintains extensive longevity records regarding "ageing and life history in animals". The AnAge database contains data convering three different kingdoms of life, but by far the most dominant of these is the `Animalia ` kingdom, and the most prevalent Phylum among these is the `Chordata` Phylum. For context, the Phylum Chordata contains 4216 entries, while the next-largest Phylum is Arthropoda, with 11 entries. We will restrict our exploration to the Phylum Chordata of the Kingdom Animalia, and further restrict our exploration to species with complete data in the AnAge dataset. This leaves us with 347 species to explore. In the rest of the report we will call these 347 species the AnAge dataset. Among this dataset there are a few critical variables. The first of these is the response variable, `Maximum.longevity.yrs`, the maximum lifespan in years of the species. Our primary explanatory variable is `Metabolic.rate`, which is the typical resting metabolic rate in Watts of the species. We have two other potentially useful explanatory variables in `Body.mass.g.`, the typical adult body mass in grams, and in `Temperature`, the typical body temperature in Kelvin. (1) To facilitate comparison across the many variable species with widely varying bodies, we will compute the variable `Metabolic.by.mass` by dividing `Metabolic.rate` by `Body.mass.g` and use this variable as our primary predictor instead of `Metabolic.rate`. (3) The distribution of response maximum longevity is right-skewed, and mostly unimodal, with a minor mode to the right of the central mode. The vast majority of the animals in the AnAge dataset have a relatively low lifespan, which indicates our sponsor's quest for immortality faces some serious obstacles. Furthermore, we can investigate some summary statistics about maximum longevity to understand its distribution better. Both of these metrics highlight the magnitude of the skew. Both mean and standard deviation are statistics that are vulnerable to skew since they use all of the available data. Both are much higher than you might expect by looking at the density plot, likely as a result of the massive scale of the high outliers relative to the scale of the mode itself. Now we will turn our attention to our predictor variables. We have access to 4 possible predictors: `Metabolic.rate`, `Body.mass.g`, `Temperature`, and `Metabolic.by.mass`. It is important to note, however, that `Metabolic.by.mass` is linear combination of `Metabolic.rate` and `Body.mass.g`, and so it would be "double dipping" to use `Metabolic.by.mass` along with either of those two are predictors. Therefore going forward we will use `Metabolic.by.mass` in place of either of those two variables. (2) Below are plots showing the univariate distribution `Metabolic.by.mass` and `Temperature`. When we look at the graphs stacked in this way it is easier to see that their distributions appear to be inverse in some way, and furthermore that the `Metabolic.by.mass` variable appears to have a very similar distribution to the response, while the `Temperature` variable seems to have an inverse distribution to the response (left skewed, unimodal.) Summary statistics also support our analysis of the above plots. The mean of `Metabolic.by.mass` is 0.0044, and its standard deviation is 0.0045, which aligns with the histogram above, but shows the strength of the rightward skew. Similarly, the mean of `Temperature` is 308.09 and its standard deviation is 5.36, which aligns with our expectation of leftward skew with a clear center.
Multivariate EDA
(4) The close matching of the marginal distributions of the predictor variables to the results might encourage us about the possibility of a straightforward linear fit, but we need to examine the actual multivariate distribution relating the predictors to the response instead of jumping to that conclusion. At first glance at the scatterplot has a gentle negative slope, but appears to have some curvature to it that indicates a linear model may not be the most effective choice. However, it is possible that a transformation of the data could yield a more promising relationship. In particular, since both of the variables of interest are right-skewed, we are interested in either a root, logarithmic, or reciprocal transformation of either variable. (5) Two interesting candidate transformations of the data are applying the log function to both variables, and applying the log function to mass-adjusted metabolism and the reciprocal to longevity. Plots for both of these are output below. The graph showing a log function applied to both variables shows the clearest linearity with minimal bending, so going forward we will work with both variables with a log function attached.
Observable Trends
(6) All the plots we have shown thus far suggest an inverse relationship between longevity and mass-adjusted metabolism (or between their logs.) This should be the priority for investigation as we move forward. Graphs relating variables like Temperature to Longevity showed a clearly lacking relationship, and so that variable will be disregarded moving forward.
Modeling & Diagnostics
(1) First, we will construct a basic linear fit predicting `Maximum.longevity.yrs` by mass-adjusted metabolism. Below is output a summary of the straightforward linear model. The linear fit has modest success in accounting for variation. The predictor variable is clearly significant at a high level, and the F-test for the overall model also showed clearly significant results over simply guessing the average. R-squared is a somewhat flawed metric, but having a multiple R-squared of 0.342 indicates that this basic linear model is leaving a lot of variation in lifespan unexplained. With that mind, we think we can do somewhat better. (2) Next, we will fit 5 different spline models with effective degrees of freedom between 3 and 7. (3) In order to select between these models (the simple linear regression and each of the 5 different splines), we will use 5-fold cross validation where we select a train and test set by withholding a single evenly-sized fold from the data, train each model on the train set, and evaluate on the test set. Below is output a table showing the mean and standard deviation of the squared error values from cross validation. Since the spline model with 3 degrees of freedom had the lowest cross validation mean squared error, we will proceed using the spline model with 3 degrees of freedom. (5) However it is important to note that all the spline models are quite close to each other in mean squared error in context of the standard deviations output below, so it could be that another spline model is truly the best option. To evaluate whether the spline model with 3 effective degrees of freedom is valid, we will plot the spline over the data, as well as output residual diagnostics. (4) This model does appear to fit well juding by the above plot. It well navigates the curvature of the data and has the piecewise linear structure you would expect looking at a scatterplot. Furthermore the residuals plot shows none of the usual elements that would make us suspicious of the fit. (6) Since the residuals appear not to depend on the value of the predictor and we are confident in the general correctness of the model, resampling residuals appears to be a fine solution for bootstrapping, and resampling cases is not necessary.
Results
(1) Judging by the plot of the fitted spline model with 3 effective degrees of freedom on top of the AnAge data, having lower metabolic rate does seem to predict a higher longevity on average. It is important to keep in mind, however, that none of this analysis has causal implications! We did not randomly assign the metabolic rates of the animals, and we could easily be observing some confounding variable. To further support this analyis we can look back to the simple linear regression we performed earlier that showed a significant negative coefficient on metabolism predicting longevity. This is strong evidence that there is a relationship between metabolism and longevity. (2) If the crab-eating racoon decreased in metabolic rate by 50% while maintaining an average mass, the predicted longevity for this species would jump from approximately 14 years to approximately 18.5 years. However it is worth noting that the actual maximum longevity for this species has a positive residual and the maximum longevity of this species without any manipulation is 19 years.
Conclusions
(1) We have been able to demonstrate that metabolic rate (adjusted for mass) has an inverse relationship with longevity on average across species, and put forward a robust spline model to predict longevity based on metabolic rate and mass. (2) However, this should not immediately push Mr Jorgenson to conclude that reducing the crab-eating racoon's metabolic rate by 50% would cause its lifespan to change, since we have only observational data, and not experimental data. (3) The assumptions of our models are quite well accounted for, but it is critical not to take away a conclusion that these methods do not support. Specifically, nothing implies that intervention in the metabolic processing of a species will have any causal effect on the species' longevity.
