Introduction
Billionaire Preston Jorgensen would like to understand factors related to lifespan, and invest in research projects which use these factors to achieve immortality. (1) There are three aspects that he is particularly interested in. First, will slowing the metabolic rate increase the lifespan? Second, is the relationship between metabolic rate and lifespan nonlinear, even after transformations? Is a nonparametric model more approriate? Third, Jorgensen wants a pet to keep him company. Given the established model, what does it predict for the mean lifespan for an animal with crab-eating raccoon's characteristics but a 50% smaller metabolic rate? (2) To analyze these questions, I use data from the AnAge Database of Animal Ageing and Longevity. The dataset contains 347 observations of animals in the Chordata phylum (animals with spinal cords). Each observation includes variables such as kindom, common name, lifespan, body mass, metabolic rate, and body temperature. (3) The main findings to the three guiding questions are the following: First, a slower metabolic rate is associated with longer lifespan. Second, after transformation, the relationship between metabolic rate and lifespan appears to be moderately linear. But a nonparametric model such as the smoothing spline is more approriate. Third, for an animal having similar body mass and metabolic rate with the crab-eating raccoon, if its metabolic were 50% smaller, my model will predict its mean lifespan to be between 18.33647 years and 22.70744 years.
Exploratory Data Analysis
The research goal is to explore the relationship between lifespan and metabolic rate. (1) To allow comparisons between animals of different sizes, I first create a new variable which divides the metabolic rate by body mass. This is the amount of energy used per unit of body mass. I call this varible "metabolic by mass". I will use "metabolic by mass" instead of "metabolic rate" in the rest of my report. (2) Metabolic by mass ranges from 4.543e-05 to 4.143e-02 watt/gram. It has a median of 3.023e-03 watt/gram and a mean of 4.405e-03 watt/gram. As shown in Figure 1, the distribution is unimodal and heavily skewed to the right. (3) My repsonse variable is the maximum longevity (lifespan). It ranges from 2.5 to 122.5 years, with a median of 12.9 years and mean of 16.01 years. As shown in Figure 2, the distruibution is unimodal and heavily skewed to the right. (4) & (5) Without any transformation, the relationship between metabolic by mass and lifespan is not linear according to Figure 3. The data points are clusterd in the lower left corner. Based on the univariate EDA, both the predictor variable, metabolic by mass, and the reponse variable, lifespan, are skewed to the right. Thus, I apply log transformation on both variables to rectify the skewness. After the transformation, as shown in Figure 4, the relationship appears to be moderately linear. As metabolic by mass increases, lifespan decreases. But the relationship seemes more like a curve which is concave down. (6) According to Figure 4, as metabolic by mass decreases, lifespan increases. This suggests that if I fit a linear model of lifespan against metabolic by mass, I will get a negative coefficient. Also notice that in Figure 4, the relationship between lifespan and metabolic by mass seems to be a curve which is concave down. This suggests that a linear model may not be the most appropriate model to explain the trend. A nonparametric model such as the smoothing spline might be a good option.
Modeling & Diagnostics
After the exploratory data analysis, I decide to use transformations on both lifespan and metabolic by mass. In the following report, "lifespan" represents the log transformed lifespan, and "metabolic by mass" represents the log transformed metabolic by mass. (1) Because the relationship between lifespan and metabolic by mass appears to be moderately linear, I start by constructing a linear model. Metabolic stands for metabolic by mass in the following linear regression model. newline $Lifespan = beta1Metabolic+ beta0$ newline After fitting the data, I get the following model: newline $Lifespan = -0.39993 Metabolic + 0.14920$ newline The negative coefficient before metabolic by mass is consistent with what we expect. newline (2) According to the exploratory data analysis, a nonparametric model may be more approriate. To better explain the data through more sophisticated and flexible models, I move on to use smoothing spline to fit the same data. Specifically, I fit five models. Their effective degrees of freedom range from 3 to 7. (3) To determine which of the models fits best to the data in terms of prediction error, I use k fold cross-validation with k = 5. Figure 5 demonstrates the error for different models, where the linear model corresponds to an effective degrees of freedom of 2. The error I get for the linear model is 0.3682643. And the errors I get for the smoothing spline models with effective degrees freedom ranging from 3 to 7 are 0.3593119, 0.3567590, 0.3551119, 0.3543140 and 0.3544876 respectively. I decide that the smoothing spline model with effective degrees of freedom = 6 is the best model for two reasons. First, it has the lowest cross validation error among all models. Second, according to the exploratory data analysis, a nonparametric model may better capture the overall curvature in the data. (4) To check if my selected best model model appears to fit well, I plot the original data and the fitted line. As shown in in Figure 6, the model captures the general trend of the data and fits the data quite well. I also perform residual diagnostics. In Figure 7, the residuals seem to violate the gaussian noise assumption because the two tails deviate from the qq line. In Figure 8, the residulas seem to depend on the predictor. The residuals appear to be more negative for larger metabolic by mass values. It looks like there is an unexplained negative trend in the residuals. The diagnostics suggest that I could fit a more flexible model to better explain the data. Also, there is only 347 observations in the dataset. It would be helpful to include more data points to improve the model. (5) The difference between the models does not appear significant. According to Figure 5, the estimated prediction MSEs of different models vary by less than 0.016. But the estimated standard errors are all around 0.03. The standard deviation I get for the linear model is 0.03337748. And the standard deviations I get for the smoothing spline models are 0.03110637, 0.03006737, 0.02974603, 0.02967416 and 0.02966523. It would not be surprising to find that I get a different best model if I use a different setup for cross validation. (6) According to Figure 8, the residuals violate the gaussian noise assumption. Because I don't know the distribution of the residuals, I could not use parametric bootstrap. Also, in Figure 7, the residulas seem to depend on the predictor. The residuals are more negative for larger metabolic by mass values, which makes resampling residuals inappropriate. Thus, "resample (X,Y) pairs" would be the appropriate type of bootstrap.
Results
(1) According to Figure 6, it seems that animals with lower metabolic rates have longer lifespans, as requested by Preston Jorgensen. However, it is important to remember that this is an observational study. The metabolic rates are not randomly assigned to animals. Thus, I can not draw causation between metabolic rate and lifespan because there might be unmeasured counfouding variables outside the dataset. Through my study, I can only conclude that lower metabolic rate is associated with longer lifespan. (2) The crab-eating raccoon has a lifespan of 19 years, a bodyweight of 1160 grams and a metobalic rate of 2.588 watts. If its metabolic rate were 50% smaller, its estimated mean lifespan predicted by my model would be 20.77764 years. (3) Using "resample (X,Y) paris" with 1000 bootstrap iterations, I get a 95% pivotal confidence interval of (18.33647 years, 22.70744 years). Notice that 19 is within the confidence interval. Thus, I can not conclude that an animal with 50% slower metabolic rate has a different lifespan than the original.
Conclusions
(1) The relationship between metabolic rate and lifespan is moderately linear. Slower metabolic rate is associated with longer lifespan. But I can only conclude association instead of causation because the predictor is not randomly assigned and there might be unmeasured counfounding variable outside the dataset. To better explain the bending downwards trend in the data, a nonparametric model such as smoothing spline would be more desired than a simple linear regression model. (2) I can not conclude that reducing the crab-eating raccoon's metabolic rate by 50% would cause its lifespan to change. Right now, the raccoon has a lifespan of 19 years. If its metablic rate were 50% smaller, the confidence interval of mean lifespan would be between 18.33647 years and 22.70744 years. Because this interval contains 19 years, I do not have sufficient evidence to say that the lifespan will be different for a raccoon with 50% slower metabolic rate. (3) There exists some limitations to my analysis that might affect my conclusions. First, in my fitted model, there seems to be an unexplained negative trend in the residuals, which suggests a more flexible model. Also, the errors I get from my potential models (linear model and spline models) have small differences compared to their standard deviations. Thus, it would be possible that I get different best models when I change the cross validation procedure. Lastly, the current dataset only includes animal species with spinal cords. Including more animals from a wider range may offer more insight.
