1 Introduction
The quest for the elixer of immortality has been pursued by alchemists and scientists across many ages and cultures. However, with new medical discoveries being made each year, the promise of uncovering the key to a dramatically enhanced lifespan draws closer and closer. The objective of this study is to determine what, if any, factors that appear to be related to longevity and have the potential to increase human lifespan. We do this by analyzing the factors that influence longevity in other animal species (1). We examine species taken from the AnAge Database of Animal Ageing and Longevity, which contains information from a species' taxonomy to longevity, body temperature, and metabolism. There are 347 different species and 14 features within our dataset (2). We find that there is a negative and nonlinear relationship between lifespan and metabolic rate. From our analysis of the Crab-Eating Raccoon, our model predicts that halving the metabolic rate is correlated with an increase in the lifespan of the animal (3). The findings from our analysis indicate that future research should be conducted along this avenue.
2 Exploratory Data Analysis
2.1 Dataset
The AnAge Database of Animal Ageing and Longevity is a "a curated database of ageing and life history in animals". The dataset that we are using is a subset of the more than 4000 species contained within the database. Our dataset contains 347 observations and 14 variables. Each of these observations represent a different animal species. The 14 features represent different aspects of the species such as its HAGRID (unique ID), scientific classification, Longevity, Metabolic rate, and more. The dataset includes each animal's taxonomic classification from Kingdom to Species. Relevant features are included below: `Maximum.longevity.yrs` : Represents the maximum longevity (lifespan) in years. `Body.mass.g` : The typical adult body mass in grams. `Metabolic.rate` : The typical resting metabolic rate in Watts. `Temperature` : The typical body temperature in Kelvin.
2.2 Data Exploration
We examine the univariate distributions for our predictor variables Body.mass.g, Maximum.longevity.yrs, and Temperature. We want to use a new variable, Metabolic.by.mass, instead of Metabolic.rate. This is because we want to make comparisons between different animals, and measuring the amount of energy consumed per unit of body mass makes for a better comparison (1). When evaluating the different features we should also be cognizant that all of the animals which we are examining belong to the same Kingdom and Phylum. Examining the data at the Class taxonomic level in Figure 1, we see that most of our animals are mammals (Mammalia). This may have an effect on some of the trends for other variables, such as longevity, mass, temperature, etc. The questions we seek to answer do not explicitly ask us to account for this difference. That being said, it stands to reason that given mammals are more closely related to humans than reptiles, this should not severly impact the results of our report. ### Univariate EDA We begin by investigating the univariate distributions for our predictor variables. From the plots in Figure 2, the typical body temperatures appear to be around 310 degree kelvin (approx. 98 degrees Fahrenheit). This is perhaps because of the high number of mammals in our dataset. The body mass (in grams) of our animals has a notable outlier, which is the elephant. Many of our animals are not very large, and there is significant skew in the plot. Additionally, most of the animals in our dataset have a Metabolic rate by mass that is lower than 0.01. Note that all of the histograms indicate significant skew, which we will address later in the transformations section of the report (2). Our response variable, Maximum Longevity, appears to be unimodal with a right skew. It appears that most of the animals in our dataset do not live extremely long lives. Only a few shoot past and match the longest livespans of humankind (3). ### Multivariate EDA From the pairs plot in Figure 3, it appears that our response variable has a negative and nonlinear relationship with our `Metabolic.by.mass` variable. There also appears to be a positive nonlinear relationship between temperature and `Metabolic.by.mass`. Should we use these variables in a model we may have to account for multicollinearity. Since many of our plots have indicate nonlinear relationships we can consider a log transform for these variables (4).
2.3 Transformations
When examining Figure 3 and the other variable distribution plots from our univariate data exploration, we see that there is significant skew across many of the variables. Thus, a log-transformation was applied to the suspect features. The log-transformed variables are stored in a separate data frame. Looking at Figure 4, we find that our log transformation has helped change our data to be more linear. We can also see that post log-transformation, that there appears to be a negative and maybe linear relationship between Metabolic Rate and Longevity (5). This suggets that we may want to explore this potential relationship further in the analysis. We could do so by building a linear model and then working from there (6).
3 Modeling and Diagnostics 
2.3 Transformations
We first construct a linear model analyzing the relationship between metabolic rate and lifespan using our log-transformed data. The model is as follows (1): $Lifespan = beta_0 + beta_1MRate$ We can see from the plot in Figure 4 that the trend appears to indicate that there may exist a relationship between an animal's longevity and their metabolic rate. The plot of our linear model (Figure 5) appears to reflect that intuition. We should however also check if we violate any assumptions of the Simple Linear Regression model. From the residual plots in Figure 6, there appears to be some slight curvature to the QQ-plot. This indicates that we may potentially be in violation of the linearity assumption. In addition to fitting a linear model, we also want to try and fit a more sophisticated and flexible model. We thus create a nonlinear model by using a smoothing spline on the data. We will create five models on the same data and set the degrees of freedom (df) to be 3,4,...,7 (2). 5-fold cross validation will also be used to determine which of the models fit best to the data, in terms of prediction error. After running the Cross-Validation upon the linear and spline model, we found that the SLR model performed worse with a CV error of 0.3662516 and Standard Error of 0.01296822, while our spline model with 6 degrees of freedom performed the best. The spline model with df of 5 has a MSE of 0.3565859 and Standard Error of 0.01059897 (3). We note that while the Spline model performed better than the linear model in this case, the difference does not seem significant when comparing the MSE and SE (5). The estimated MSE and SE values are simply too close and it seems possible that changing the seed could potentially result in even smaller differences in values between the linear and spline model. After examining the residual diagnostics for our best Spline model in Figure 8, it appears that our linearity, normality, and constant variance assumptions hold (4). We can see that the residuals have an even spread across x = 0, and the QQ plot indicates that our residuals are very close to what they should be. While there are still outliers, that is to be expected given our error value. If we seek to bootstrap our data, we should use a nonparametric bootstrap (6).
4 Results
2.3 Transformations
As observed from previous figures and analysis, there does appear to be a negative relationship between Lifespan and Metabolic rate. This suggests that animals with slower metabolic rates generally have longer lifespans (1). We can thus estimate what the mean lifespan is of a Crab-Eating Raccoon should its metabolic rate be 50% lower. We calculate (calculations in code) that with these conditions, our estimated lifespan for a Crab-Eating Raccoon would be 20.11 years (2). When checking back to the original maximum lifespan data, we find that we have a mean value that is higher than the recorded maximum longevity of 19 years. We can see how confident we are about our estimate by bootstrapping. We use 1000 bootstrap iterations and our result is a 95% confidence interval of [18.64897, 22.81047] (3). This means that we are 95% confident that the true estimated lifespan for a Crab-Eating Raccoon with a 50% reduced metabolic rate lies within our interval of [18.64897, 22.81047]. We see that a reduced metabolism may indeed be related to increased lifespans.
5 Conclusion
2.3 Transformations
We found that using a smoothed spline model (df = 5) fits our data best. We reached this conclusion after evaluating residuals and performing cross-validation and estimating standard error. Our model indicated that there exists a negative and nonlinear relationship between lifespan and metabolic rate (1). Looking at our bootstrap, we estimated that a Crab-Eating Raccoon with a halved metabolic rate could be expected to live for more than 20 years. This is the same value as the maximum longevity value within the AnAge dataset. We can conclude that our prediction is that lowering an animal's metabolic rate by half will result in an increased lifespan, however, it is not necessarily true that reducing the Raccoon's metabolic rate by half will directly increase its lifespan (2). Essentially, lowering metabolic rate does not neccessarily directly increase lifespan. Finally, there are still limitations within our analysis that we need to account for. We had a very restricted sample of animals as reflected in figure 1, and out of the different classes and orders, it would seem to make sense to restrict our data to only animals that are closest to human beings. This would probably restrict our species to those within the same family, maybe order. A biologist should possibly be consulted for this. The choice of seed also appeared to impact the numbers and results. Since our predicted values for spline and linear model were very close, it is conceivable that a different seed would have resulted in the investigation of the linear model instead. However, we did investigate the residuals, and so the error caused by the seed was minimized. A possible workaround would be to run the code we used over a variety of different seeds (3).
