Introduction
During the best two decades, Youtube has risen as a video streaming company. Millions of people are watching Youtube daily for a variety of topics. Different content creators have become very successful on Youtube, making millions of dollars(influencermarketinghub). This fun and luxurious job has become more sought out due to the wealth obtained by many content creators. Therefore, many ask questions concerning what would make them a successful Youtuber. Therefore, the question that had motivated this study was, what would make someone a wealthier and more successful Youtuber?
Data
To try to create an answer for this question, we have collected data concerning 1259 current content creators on Youtube. The website Social Blade has collected and produced data sets of information for each channel for this exploratory data analysis. The data set comes from data for each of the 1259 channels of the sample up to the end of 2018. The categories of data collected include the names of each content creator, their user-defined channel type, the country of origin of each channel, the age of each Youtube account in weeks (age calculations were all taken on December 31, 2018), the amount of videos uploaded by each channel, the number of subscribers for each channel, the total views across all videos for each channel, the total views divided by videos for each channel, and the continent of origin of each channel. The three research questions we have created to answer the motivation question of interest are: Does the number of subscribers to the channel have a relationship with the user-defined channel topic? Do the amount of videos uploaded by the channel have a relationship with the user-defined channel topic? Does the total views across all videos have a relationship with the user-defined channel topic? The number of subscribers was measured by person, the amount of videos uploaded was measured by video posted onto Youtube and the amount of views was measured by a count of views. The user-defined channel topic is measured by a categorical topic each different Youtuber created videos about(being either comedy, sports, lifestyle, news and politics, entertainment, education, film and animation, or gaming). Below will contain data summarizing the variables of interest, which are the user-defined channel topics, number of subscribers, amount of videos uploaded, and total views across all videos.
Above contains a bar graph and a frequency table, which were used to describe the distribution of user-defined channel topics chosen out of the 1259 Youtubers. It can be seen that the most popular topic within this sample was entertainment (517 Youtubers) and the second most popular topic was music. The least popular topic was sports (23 Youtubers) and the second least popular topic was news and politics.
Above is a histogram and statistical summary table data values for the number of subscribers across each channel (each Youtuber has their own channel). The data seemed to be skewed to the right, and there seemed to be outliers around 27.5 million-27.999 million subscribers and 23.5 million-23.999 million subscribers. The maximum number of subscribers was 27765423 subscribers, the median was 1949612.00 subscribers(half of the sample had this many or less subscribers) and the minimum number of subscribers was 107329.000 subscribers. The interquartile range was 2793816.500, meaning the 75th percentile differed from the 25th percentile by this amount of subscribers. The histogram was unimodal with a mode around 1 millions to 1.499 million subscribers.
Above is a histogram and a statistical summary table containing information concerning the data obtained regarding the amount of video uploads by each channel (each Youtuber has one channel). The histogram seemed to be unimodal and skewed to the right. There were very strong outliers, two being all the way between 128.9535k-130.256k. There were many other outliers far away from the majority of the data, but these were the farthest.The maximum number of videos uploaded by a Youtuber was 130256.000 videos, the median number of videos uploaded was 682 videos(half of the sample had this amount of videos posted or less), the minimum amount of videos uploaded was 1.000 video. The interquartile range was 2046.500, meaning the 75th percentile differed from the 25th percentile by this amount of video uploads.
Above is a histogram and a statistical summary table containing data concerning the number of views across all videos for each channel in this sample (each Youtuber has their own channel). The histogram seemed to be unimodal and there seemed to be a strong outlier between 24.5B-25B views (there were other outliers, they just were not as far away from the data as this one. The data seemed to be skewed to the right. The median number of views across all videos in this sample was 675927454.000 views(half of the sample had this amount of views or less), the maximum number of videos was 24518098041.000 videos, and the minimum was 593861.000. The interquartile range was 1097106234.500, meaning the 75th percentile differed from the 25th percentile by this amount of views.
For these three sets of summary statistic tables, we chose to do a five number summary and an interquartile range measurement because these sets of data had many of outliers, and medians and interquartile ranges were less affected by outliers when compared to the means and standard deviations of this data set.
Research Scenarios
Does the number of subscribers to the channel have a relationship with the user-defined topic?
To answer this question, we created a box plot to compare the categorical variable of user-defined channel topic with the quantitative variable of subscribers. We also created a summary statistic table containing the five number summary values and interquartile ranges obtained from comparing the two variables of subscribers and user-defined channel topics. The data on the summary statistic table was seen to reflect the trends and data on the boxplot. We thought that people mostly subscribe to channels that are funny, because due to experience, people look to Youtube as a way to relax and have fun.
According to this data, the comedy category seemed to have a larger median compared to the other categories when looking at the summary statistics table, meaning that we could say half of the comedy Youtubers had this large amount(2935293.500 subscribers) or less of subscribers, according to this data. This median was around 700,000(or more) more subscribers than any of the other categories. This supports the thought that comedy Youtubers had the most subscribers since comedy Youtubers had to have had some large amounts of subscribers to bring this 50th percentile value up so high. The comedy category had an interquartile range of 3825163.750 subscribers, which was large, but this spread in data was mostly caused by high, not low, outliers, so the previous thought of comedy Youtubers in this data having the most subscribers should not necessarily be retracted due to this spread in data. Similar to the comedy category, other categories like music, lifestyle, gaming and entertainment had larger median values than the median value of all the subscribers in the sample. This was significant since it showed that the medians of these categories exceeded the 50th percentile of subscribers for the whole sample(supporting the relationship between these two variables). The median values of subscribers for the Youtubers in this sample in the categories of news and politics(1536480.500 subscribers) and sports(1361377.000 subscribers) seemed to be low when compared to the median values of subscribers for Youtubers in other channel categories.
We could say that there seemed to be a relationship between the number of subscribers a channel had and their user-defined channel type since according to the summary statistic table and boxplot, channels with different topics had significantly different median values of subscribers, showing that the 50th percentile of subscribers between the different channel categories varied. This relationship was strengthened because of how these median subscriber values for the different user-defined topics differed from the median subscriber value of the whole sample. We could not say that having a comedy channel caused a person to have more subscribers because this was not an experimental study. Our hypothesis was proved correct here, since the comedy category did have the highest median, which was the value of center.
Does the number of video uploads a channel has have a relationship with the user-defined channel topic?
To answer this question, we created a boxplot comparing the quantitative variable of video uploads and the categorical variable of user-defined channel topic. We also created a summary statistics table which included the five number summary values and interquartile range values calculated when comparing the two variables of user-defined channel topic and number of video uploads for each channel. We expected news and politics to have the most video uploads since they have the most content to discuss because there are multiple political occurrences daily.
According to this data, the median value of video uploads for news and politics(32172.000 video uploads) seemed to be extremely high(about 30,000 videos higher than any other category), meaning half of the Youtubers in this category had this amount of video uploads or less. This supported the thought that news and politics Youtbers had the most video uploads since Youtubers in this category had to have had large amounts of video uploads to bring this 50th percentile value up so high. The interquartile range value for the news and politics category was 59061.750 video uploads, but, as shown by the boxplot, this IQR value was made large by high, not low, outliers, so one should not completely retract the previous thought because of this apparent spread in data. Similar to the news and politics category, other categories, including gaming, music, and entertainment also had median values of video uploads greater than the median value of video uploads of the sample, meaning the median values for these categories exceeded the 50th percentile value for all Youtuber video uploads in this sample. Youtubers with sports(467 video uploads), education(332 video uploads), comedy(320.500 video uploads) and lifestyle(304.000 video uploads) seemed to have had low median values of videos uploaded, meaning half of the Youtubers in each of these categories had or had less than a low video upload value.
Overall, according to the comparative boxplot and summary statistics table, these seemed to show that median values of video uploads varied between different channel types to a significant degree. The relationship between these two variables was strengthened by how these median values of video uploads differed from the median value of video uploads of the whole sample. Therefore, there can be said to be a relationship between the amount of videos uploaded by a channel and their user-defined channel topic. We could not say there was a causal relationship between these two variables because this was not an experimental study with random assignment. News and politic having the greatest median value supported our hypothesis.
Does the user-defined channel topic have a relationship with the total views a Youtube channel has?
To answer this question, we created a boxplot comparing the categorical variable of user-defined channel topic and the quantitative variable of total views. We also created a summary statistic table comparing these variables, which included five number summary values and interquartile range values for each category. We expected that music Youtubers would receive the most views, since music videos have the most replay-ability because people can listen to the same songs multiple times a day.
According to this data, the category types of music(843184576.000 views), comedy(712179635.000 views), gaming(685561379.000 views), and entertainment(741263478.000 views) seemed to have had larger median values of views than other categories, meaning half of the Youtubers in these categories had this high value of views or less. Music Youtbers had a median that was larger than any other by around 100 million views, supporting the thought that music Youtubers received the most views. The music category had a interquartile range value of 1425387550.750, meaning the spread of values of in this category was quite large when compared to other categories. However, the data on the boxplot shpows that this IQR value was mostly caused by high outliers, meaning one should not completely retract the earlier thought that music Youtubers in this data received the most views when compared to the view counts of other categories. The sports category had the lowest median value of views(364020491.000 views), so half of the sports Yotubers had this small amount of views or less.
Overall, there seemed to be a significant relationship between the Youtuber’s channel topic and the amount of views a Youtuber received because of the differences between the median values of views between different user-defined channel types, and because of the differences these median values had when compared to the median value of views of the whole sample. The relationships here could not have been said to be causal because this was not an experimental study with random assignment. Our hypothesis that music Youtubers would get the most views was supported by the music category having the highest median value.
Discussion
Overall, there seemed to be relationships between the amount of subscribers a channel had and their user-defined channel type, the amount of uploaded videos a channel had and their user-defined channel type, and the amount of views a channel had and their user-defined channel type. The strongest relationship was seen between the variables of video uploads and user-define channel topic, since the news and politics category had such a large median value of video uploads. According to the median values of the data, to try to answer the motivational question of the study, the comedy channel category had the largest median subscriber value, the news and politics channel category had the largest median value of video uploads, and the music Youtube channel category had the largest median value of views. Therefore, a person just starting Youtube might want to consider having a comedy channel if they would like to be in the category of Youtubers that has been seen to have the largest 50th percentile value of subscribers in this data. Also, a person just starting Youtube might want to consider having a news and politics channel if they would like to be in the category of Youtubers that has been seen to have the largest 50th percentile value of video uploads in this data. Furthermore, a person just starting Youtube might want to consider having a music channel if they would like to be in the category of Youtubers that has been seen to have the largest 50th percentile value of views in this data. High median, or 50th percentile values mean that Youtubers in those categories in this data had to have had large values in the respective variables of subscriber amount, video upload amount and view amount ton raise this 50th percentile. None of the median values calculated in this data when compared to each other were extremely low for any of the research scenarios, so it is not extremely important to avoid starting a Youtube channel in any of the categories of this sample. Overall, all of the hypothesis we postulated were correct from all three of the research scenarios. Causal relationships can not be made because this was not an experimental study with randomly assigned groups.
Issues with the data that should be mentioned were that it was not stated if these channels were randomly selected from the population or not. If random selection did not occur, then each Youtube channel would not have had the same chance of being selected, causing this data to not be representative of the population, which would make this data non-generalizable and bias. Also, the data values being large made boxplots or other charts hard to understand. Even if the boxplots seemed to be similar, summary statistic tables were needed to compare median and other values. This was because variables, like subscribers and views, were counted by millions and billions respectively. So, even though the boxplots may have looked similar, the median values for different user-defined channel topics could have been (and were) thousands(or more) of values apart, which contributed to how we noticed a relationship between variables. Other data analysts could build on this study by randomly assigning randomly selected people into different categories of user-defined youtube channels. Then, after a certain amount of months, the analysts could take data and look at the median subscriber, views and video upload values to compare them with each other. Using random assignment would allow analysts to create a causal relationship between the variable of user-defined channel topic and other variables, if there were to be relationships in this new data set.
