Introduction
Health insurance has been deemed as a positive necessity in the culture today, especially when the United States health care system relies heavily on private health insurance. Health insurance serves as the primary source of coverage for most Americans with the benefits of financial protection from unexpected, expensive medical costs. We pay a monthly premium that pays for the health care benefits under the insurance. Our health insurance premiums are based on the predictions of the potential medical costs that may incur in the future based on our medical history. Usually, people with heart conditions are considered high-risk and tend to have a higher premium cost, as hospital visits for heart disease are very costly. We would like to better understand the relationship between medical history and the total cost of claims and what increases the cost of claims.
Data
We have the information on 788 health insurance subscribers from the period of Janurary 1998 to December 1999.
The primary focus will be the variable claim costs, a quantitative variable measuring the total cost of claims made by subscribers in dollars.
Other variables involved in the research scenarios are age and duration of stay.
Age is a quantitative variable that measuring the age of subscribers. The mean age was 58.718 and the standard deviation of age is 6.754. The distribution of age is left-skewed with a unimodal distribution. The median age was 60.
Duration of stay is also a quantitative variable measuring the number of days of duration of treatment condition. The mean duration is 164 days and the standard deviation of duration is 120.916 days. The distribution of duration of stay is right-skewed with a multimodal distribution. The median duration of stay was 165.5 days.
Research Scenarios
The first research question explores whether the claim cost is associated with age, and characterizes the association if there is one. We hypothesize that costs would increase as age increases, on the means that as we age, we tend to suffer more health issues. In Figure 1, we used a scatterplot to compare the cost of total claims with the age of the subscriber.
Figure 1 shows a negative association between cost and age. The slope of the linear regression is -58.1931 and the intercept is 6216.9529. However, the shape of the plot seems not very linear with a correlation of -0.059. We cannot conclude that there’s is a relationship between costs and age as the plot isn’t very linear. There isn’t a direct correlation between cost and age and there can also be confounding variables associated with these variables such as genetics or current health conditions. There is also not enough data set for younger subscribers that might have resulted in a negative correlation.
The second question explores the association between claim costs and duration of stay. With longer hospital stays, it seems reasonable to hypothesize that the claim costs would also increase as the duration of hospital stay increases. We used a scatterplot to compare the cost of claims to the duration of hospital stay.
Figure 2 shows a positive association between costs and duration. The slope of the linear regression is 9.7201 and the intercept is 1205.5554. However again, the shape of the plot isn’t very linear with a correlation of 0.176. Because the plot isn’t very linear, we cannot conclude that there is a relationship between costs and duration. There isn't a direct relationship between costs and duration and there can be additional variables that affected the data such as the reason for the stay. Some hospital stays are more expensive than others in which special equipment is used in cases such as life support. The data set is not large enough to account for those confounding variables.
The third question explores the relationship between age and duration of stay. We hypothesized that as we age, we suffer more health issues that can lead to more hospital stays. We used a scatterplot to compare the relationship between Age and Duration of Stay.
Figure 3 shows a positive association between age and duration. The slope of the linear regression is 2.4261 and the intercept is 21.5737. However again, the shape of the plot isn’t very linear with a correlation of 0.136. As the plot isn’t linear, we cannot conclude that there is a relationship between age and duration. There isn't a direct relationship between age and duration and there can be additional variables that affected the data such as the reason for the stay. While we may suffer from more health issues as we are older, it doesn’t necessarily mean a longer duration of treatment.
Discussion
Ultimately, the research from the data set cannot conclude that there is a relationship between medical history, specifically age and gender, and claim costs. With the distribution of claim costs right-skewed, the data set concludes that the majority of the cost of claims was not that high, with a median of $507.20. The mean is adjusted by the outliers, and there were many outliers. The data set was too random to see relationships. The data set was not large enough to argue that there is a correlation between medical history and claim costs. This means that health insurances don’t necessarily increase premium costs on the factor of age and gender, but other factors that the data set did not include could factor into the premium costs, such as serious health conditions, or genetics. The data set had more bias to the elderly, with a mean of 60 years old. There was not enough data to account for younger subscribers to provide an accurate reading of the relationship between age and costs and age and duration. Future analyses might include genetics, such as if subscribers are prone to a certain health condition, accidents or unexpected injuries, and if there had serious health issues prior to the claim period. Also for future research, the data set needs to have a larger sample size as health issues are too complex and with a larger sample size, there will be less random error. Overall, this might allow us to estimate potential insurance premiums and how to lower those insurance premiums.
