As total viewership and revenue for the National Football League (NFL) steadily increases (as reported by Chad Finn, a sports columnist for the website Boston.com https://www.boston.com/sp orts/new-england-patriots/2020/01/04/nfl-tv-ratings-playoffs-patriots), so does competition. Coaches are constantly trying to find an edge on one another whether that be by running new formations, trick plays, or creating a whole new play style. They also try to maximize their key players’ performances by doing stuff like protecting key players or putting different players in at different times. The issue with this is that it is hard to quantify how beneficial implementing certain strategies can be for a teams win. My goal is to show evidence that the number of times a passer is it during a game is correlated with their performance on the field.
We have information on a sample of 3768 games from 2009 to 2018 collected by Ron Yurko, a Statistics Professor at Carnegie Mellon University.
Our main focus is going to be on the variable Times Hit, a quantitative variable that measures the number of times a passer was knocked down during a single game (including both pass and run attempts). The mode is getting hit 1 time and accounts for about 21 percent of games. The mean is 2.5 and the standard deviation is 2.05. The histogram below shows that the data is skewed heavily to the right and doesn’t have any obvious outliers.
Relationship Between Times Hit and Completion Percentage
Our first research question is to investigate how strong of a relationship exists between times hit and completion percentage.
I hypothesize that if a quarterback is hit a lot of times throughout a game his completion percentage is likely to be lower. I would like to investigate how strong this relationship is and whether there is a number of hits that a quarterback can take before his performance is significantly impacted.
We start by creating a set of box plots. Each box plot represents the distribution of completion percentages for passers hit that number of times in a game.
Overall, there is a negative relationship between times hit and completion percentage, and the relationship does appear to be linear
Relationship Between Times Hit and Interceptions Thrown
Our second research question is to investigate whether there is a relationship between Times Hit and Interceptions and to characterize the relationship if it exists.
Although an interception can be caused by multiple things, it is caused by at the very least a poor decision made by the passer. I hypothesize that as the number of times a passer is hit increases the number of interceptions they will throw also increases because being hit shows pressure is being put on the passer, forcing quicker decisions.
We start by making a set of box plots showing the distribution of interceptions thrown by the number times the passer was hit throughout the game.
Overall, there is a positive relationship. It is an interesting relationship because when a passer is hit 4 times or less it appears that the number of interceptions they throw is somewhat unaffected. However, once you get up to higher values for times hit, namely 5 times or more, the number of interceptions thrown rapidly increases. This could be worth looking deeper into to see if there is some underlying reason.
Relationship Between Times Hit and Deviation From Expected Points
Our third research question is to investigate how a passer’s aptitude for scoring changes, if at all, as the number of times they were hit throughout the game increases.
The variable deviation from expected points measures how the team performed compared to the opportunities it had. I hypothesize that there will be a negative relationship between the two variables because a passer being hit more puts him under more pressure giving him less time to make decisions.
We start by creating a set of box plots showing the distribution of deviation from expected points by times hit.
This variable contains a lot of outliers so I will base my analysis on figure 5, the same plot just zoomed in on the interquartile range.
At first glance it appears that there is a positive correlation. I argue that this is not necessarily the case because the sample size for passers that have been hit 11,12, and 13 times are 7,2, and 1 respectively. The fact that the standard deviation is .435 with a mean of .201 means that what we are observing is greatly affected by random error. Ignoring plots 11,12, and 13 on the diagram we can see that there is a virtually no relationship between times hit during the game and aptitude for scoring. There is no significant change in the median, 3rd quartile, and 1st quartile as the number of times hit increases. The only trend I see is that as times hit increases, the distance between the upper and lower fence decreases. So, as the number of times a passer is hit during a game increases his aptitude for scoring seems to stay steady.
Although there is no correlation between times hit and deviation from expected points, this does not imply that the amount of points scored is unaffected. It simply means that how they perform compared to the opportunities they are provided is unaffected.
Our analysis on passer performance for a sample of 3768 games focused on the number of times a passer was hit during the game and how it influenced certain performance statistics. We found relationships but all variables seemed to have a lot of random error. I assume this is because player performance can also be attributed to what a lot of coaches call “intangibles” or player attributes that cannot be measured. It could also be the case that different players are affected by different things. For example, a more mobile passer may be affected less by getting hit during the game because he is more used to it, or maybe a passer is just tough. Either way, the correlations we found can help guide further research into the subject for coaches to use in optimizing their game plan.
