Introduction:
In recent years, Youtube has become one of the most prominent online media outputs, where creators are able to share videos of any length with viewers from all around the world. The use of Youtube has been adapted by many companies and professional groups of all kinds. In a world where technology and social media is becoming increasingly relevant, Youtube will be a continuous tool where creators are able to share their content with the world. Through subscribers and viewership, content creators around the globe are able to make a living off of the videos they make by posting them on Youtube. The goal of this report is to use Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) to investigate if the category of a Youtube channel determines how successful they become in terms of subscribers and viewership. The information in this study may be of use to small channels who are looking to increase their popularity as well as bigger channels that may have lost some of their popularity.
Data:
Information has been collected on a sample of 1,259 Youtube channels.
Our main focus will be on the variable category. Category is a categorical variable that shows us the user-defined channel topic for the Youtube channel. The most common category within the sample is Entertainment while the least common category is Sports.
Our research questions will also focus on the three variables of subscribers, views, and viewsPerVideo. The variable subscribers is a quantitative variable that shows the number of people subscribed to a Youtube channel. The variable views is also a quantitative variable that shows that total number of views or video plays a Youtube channel has managed to accumulate throughout all its videos. The variable viewsPerVideo is once again a quantitative variable that shows the total views of a channel divided by the amount of videos that channel has.
Research Scenarios:
Our first question will be to analyze if there is any association or correlation between a Youtube channel’s category and the amount of subscribers they have. Based on the sample data and the fact that Entertainment is the most common category within the sample, we hypothesize that if a channel is focused on entertainment, they will attract more subscribers.
Looking at the box plot below of subscribers given category (Figure 1), we observe that the interquartile range for most of the categories lies between 0 and 5 million subscribers. We see that the 75th percentile for Comedy actually lies above 5 million subscribers, and Comedy has the greatest median of around 2.94 million subscribers. Comedy also has the greatest upper fence out of any of the other categories at around 10.16 million subscribers. The highest maximum within the plot goes to Entertainment with a maximum of 27.77 million subscribers. The category with the lowest median is Sports at around 1.36 million subscribers while the category with the lowest minimum is Gaming at around 107.329 thousand subscribers.
Our second question will be to analyze if there is any association or correlation between a Youtube channel’s category and the total amount of views they have. Based on the sample data and the fact that Entertainment is the most common category within the sample, it is once again reasonable to hypothesize that if a channel is focused on entertainment, they will attract more views.
Looking at the box plot below of views given category (Figure 2), we observe that the interquartile range for all of the categories lies between 0 and 5 billion views. In this plot, we see that the highest median across all categories is Music with 843.18 million views followed closely by Entertainment with 741.26 million views and then Comedy with 712.18 million views. Here we also observe that Music has the greatest interquartile range (50% range) and highest upper fence at around 3.89 billion views. The highest maximum within the plot goes to Entertainment with a maximum of 24.52 billion views. The category with the lowest median is Sports at around 1.36 million views followed closely by Education at around 493.92 million views. The category with the lowest minimum is Entertainment at around 593.86 thousand views.
Our third question will be to analyze if there is any association or correlation between a Youtube channel’s category and the views per video they have. Based on the sample data and the fact that Entertainment is the most common category within the sample, once again it is reasonable to hypothesize that if a channel is focused on entertainment, they will attract more views per video.
Looking at the box plot below of viewsPerVideo given category (Figure 3, Figure 4 is a closeup of Figure 3), we observe that the interquartile range for all of the categories lies between 0 and 5 million views per video. In this plot, we see that the highest median across all categories is Comedy with 1.98 million views per video followed by Lifestyle with 1.68 million views per video and then Education with around 1.53 million views per video. Here we also observe that Music has the greatest interquartile range (50% range) once again while Education holds the highest upper fence at around 11.45 million views per video. The highest maximum within the plot goes to Music with a maximum of 211.31 million views per video. The category with the lowest median is News & Politics at around 18.55 thousand views per video. The category with the lowest minimum is also News & Politics at 4.51 thousand views.
Discussion:
Our Analysis was centered around categories of Youtube channels and how successful channels in these categories are, based on subscribers, views, and viewsPerVideo. Overall, we encountered in all three of our research questions that our hypothesis was proven wrong. Education did not turn out to be one of the most successful categories in terms of subscribers, views, and viewsPerVideo. Instead, we found the category Comedy to be the most successful category in terms of subscribers and viewsPerVideo while the category Music was the most successful category in terms of total views. Notable least successful categories across all three variables were Sports and News & Politics. This tells us that the categories Comedy and Music are the most likely to bring in revenue to their respective channels and are deemed the most successful Youtube categories.
Limitations to this study could be that the sample size was not big enough, therefore showing less random variability within the results. Another limitation could be the timing of when this information was recorded. For example, if a major political event was happening at the time of when the information was collected, would the views from channels in the News & Politics category increase?
Future analysis of this topic may include researching the revenue that Youtube channels within a specific category make. By looking at the quantitative amount of revenue, we can measure another variable of success within the Youtube community. We could also conduct surveys that would allow participants to indicate which specific Youtube channels they enjoy more and watch more frequently as to examine the characteristics of them and analyze why they became popular.
