Introduction:
In the 21st century, YouTube is one of the most famous websites that people spend a considerably large amount of time on. The variety of videos featured on the website allows people of all ages to view contents they are interested in, which ranges from video game streams and tutorials, to breaking news and memes. In addition, statistics show that over 2 billion users watch YouTube videos each month, and over 74% of the adult population in the United States uses YouTube, which is more than the percentage of Facebook users (as recorded by https://blog.hootsuite.com/youtube-stats-marketers). Many YouTube users subscribe to channels with specific contents they are in favor of. The money received from channel subscriptions and views has always been a crucial source of income for content creators. Therefore, it is essential for them to understand users’ preferences and create appropriate videos for their targeted group of audience to maintain the source of their revenue.
Data:
All the sources and data referenced in this report are collected by the website Social Blade. It has gathered the relevant information until the end of 2018, which includes viewing metrics, channel categories, and locations.
While there are a total of 1259 samples collected by the Social Blade, we have limited the number down to the 595 samples (channels) that are from the United States.
The three research questions are related to the following three variables: number of views in total, number of subscribers, and the different category groups based on channel topics. The first two variables, namely “views” and “subscribers”, are quantitative variables that give numerical information about YouTube users. In the 595 samples, the mean number of views is around 1 billion, while the mean number of subscribers is slightly more than 3 million. The last variable, namely “category”, is a categorical variable that includes 9 different topics identified by users.
Research Scenarios:
Research Question 1: Is there a relationship between the number of YouTube subscribers and the number of views in the United States?
We hypothesize that there is a positive relationship between the number of subscribers and the number of views because YouTube subscribers are notified whenever the person who is being subscribed to posts a video. This indicates that more people have noticed about the new video, and therefore it is more likely to gain views.
Based on the scatter plot above (Figure 1), we plot the number of subscribers on the x-axis and the number of views on the y-axis to observe if a larger number in subscribers corresponds to an increase in the number of views. The orange regression line tells us that the relationship looks linear. Therefore, it is appropriate to refer to the Table 1 below about the correlation coefficient number.
While we noticed that there are a few outliers between 15 million to 20 million subscribers, it does not affect much about the overall trend. Since the correlation coefficient is 0.713 and in this case, we can reasonably conclude that there is a strong, positive relationship between the two quantitative variables (the more subscribers, the more views).
Research Question 2: Would different topic categories affect much about the number of YouTube subscribers?
We hypothesize that different topic categories would influence the number of YouTube subscribers, since there are several topics that seem to be more closer and relatable for most people, such as Entertainment and Lifestyle. For YouTube channels that are geared towards these two topics, they are more likely to have more subscribers, which means that the graphs would look somewhat symmetric or left-skewed.
According to the histogram on Figure 2, we notice that almost all the graphs are unimodal, strongly skewed to the right (positive skewness), and possess a long, right tail with outliers. Based on the properties of right-skewed graphs, medians come after the mode, which is then followed by the mean. This can be verified by the data in Table 2, where all the median values are less than the mean values. However, there is an exception with the “News & Politics” category, where the mean is less than the median (3316585 < 4163102), implying a graph that is skewed left.
We deduce that the “News & Politics” category is skewed to the left due to the relatively small sample size that is used in this scenario. While the other categories have at least 10 samples, there are only 7 samples for this particular category, which might be an indicator that it does not sufficiently represent the actual population. Moreover, the evidence shown above have refuted our initial hypothesis that some topics that we originally thought were more popular should be skewed left or symmetric. Therefore, we conclude that different category groups (topics) do not affect much about the number of subscribers.
Research Question 3: Is the different category(topic) groups causing the high/low number of views?
We hypothesize that the different topics are associated with the variation in the number of views since people have preferences in what they tend to watch, but not causation because it is hard to eliminate the lurking variables in this case of study.
As we observe the box plots on Figure 3, we can easily see some variations in the median values. In addition, most categories have a large range value (calculated by maximum - minimum). Again, there are obvious higher outliers except for the “News & Politics” category.
By looking at the data on Table 3, we can validate our observation that there is indeed a high variation between each category, whether that is the value for median, maximum, or interquartile range (Q3-Q1). While it might be sufficient to say that the two variables are somehow associated with one another, it does not satisfy the conditions for proving “causation,” in which it requires the process of random sampling and randomly assigning explanatory variables.
Discussion:
This statistical report that is based on the data collected by the Social Blade focuses on investigating the possible relationships or causations between the number of views, subscribers, and YouTube channel topics. In conclusion, we found that there is a strong, positive correlation between the number of subscribers and views, which is just as expected. However, the right-skewed graphs regarding our research problem 2 suggests that there isn’t a clear relationship between the number of subscribers and the topics on YouTube. In addition, we are missing specific key methods for us to correctly conclude causations between two variables. For future studies, researchers should examine other variables that might help increase a content creator’s subscriptions and views. The potential ones may include strategies in marketing or the different video-editing effects used.
