Introduction:
The diamonds one might wear on an engagement ring, a necklace, or a pair of earrings are a result of days, months, or many years within a high pressure and high temperature environment. As billions of carbon atoms form strong covalent bonds with one another, they form crystallized structures which can then be removed from the earth and produced into the sparkling diamonds we wear on our accessories (as specified within the Smithsonian Magazine: https://www.smithsonianmag.com/science-nature/diamonds-unearthed-141629226/#:~:text=Diamonds%20are%20made%20of%20carbon,together%20to%20start%20growing%20crystals.&text=That's%20why%20a%20diamond%20is,that%20form%20between%20carbon%20atoms). There are various dimensions by which the quality of each diamond can be measured. This work aims to explore the effects some of these variables have on the final selling price of each diamond. Ultimately, we aim to enlighten those looking for diamonds regarding the various facets behind how each diamond may be priced.
Data:
Our data is a sample of 5,000 diamonds. Our main focus is the extent to which various qualitative aspects impact the final price of each diamond. The final price is a quantitative variable, measured in dollars, indicating the selling price of the diamond.
The variables to be explored in relation to final price are carat, cut, and color. The variable carat is a quantitative variable measuring the weight of the diamond (1 carat=200mg). The variable cut is a categorical variable measuring the graded quality of the cut of the diamond. The categories of this variable are fair, good, very good, premium, and ideal. Lastly, the variable color is a categorical variable measuring the graded color of each diamond. The categories of this variable, from worst to best, are J, I, H, G, F, E, D.
Exploring Price vs. Carat:
Our first question relates to the relationship between the carat of the diamond, and its final price, hypothesizing that there will be a positive relationship between the two variables; as carat increases, so will the diamond’s price.
Below, Figure 1 displays a scatterplot between our x and y variables (carat and price, respectively). Carat acts as the explanatory variable, and price is the response variable. We observe a relatively strong positive correlation between the two variables, and notice vertical clusters above each increment of 0.5 carats. We could postulate this is due to diamond manufacturers rounding the carats, or tending to produce diamonds by these increments to make it easier.
The formula for our regression line is y=-2230.745252+7677.675113x. From this formula, we predict that price increases by $7677.675113 when carat increases by 1 on average. However, we cannot extrapolate due to our sample diamonds lying within 0.2 and 3.01 carats.
Although there are outliers, our hypothesis is supported by the data.
Exploring Price Given Cut:
The second research question is to see whether the price is related to the quality of the cut of the diamond. We hypothesize that as the quality of cut increases, so will the price.
To investigate this scenario, figure 2 graphically displays the data with side by side boxplots.
Our hypothesis is slightly supported by the boxplots, in that as the quality of cut increases, so does price. This is due to the rise in median values as well as upper fence values. However, the data for the Ideal category does not follow the rising trend. This could be due to a number of factors which could be further explored.
The last research question is to explore if there is a relationship between the color of the diamond and its price. We hypothesize that as the graded color of the diamond increases, so will the price.
In order to explore the possible relationship between these two variables, figure 3 graphically displays the data with a side by side boxplot.
Because we see the opposite of what we hypothesized, figure 4 displays more side by side boxplots. The categorical variable remains color, but the quantitative variable is now carat.
Here we notice that the median values for carat increase as color quality gets worse. This relationship shows that carat negatively correlates with color in that as color quality improves, carat count decreases. Furthermore, this relationship accounts for the negative correlation between price and color since figure 1 proved there to be a positive relationship between carat count and price.
Discussion:
In summary, our research involved a sample of 5,000 diamonds, and explored how the variables carat, cut, and color related to the final price of each diamond. We hypothesized that as each of our three variables increased, the final price would also increase. We saw this positive linear correlation in the scatterplot (figure 1), thus supporting our hypothesis. However, this hypothesis was only slightly supported in the side by side boxplots (figure 2). Finally, our hypothesis was opposite of what the side by side boxplots of figure 3 showed. Through further investigation and the display of more data in figure 4, we saw that the relationship between price and color was due in part to the relationship between carat and color. Further analysis might look into the relationship between the actual dimensions of each diamond (height, length, depth), and how they relate to the final price, as well as interact with the variables we used in this research.
Ultimately, this analysis could help shoppers who are looking to purchase diamonds understand some of the factors behind each diamond, how they may influence the final price, and to what extent.
