Introduction
Youtube has become an increasingly important platform as it propels creators to fame and success, racking up millions of views and dollars. These creators’ videos become a place for advertisements and sponsorships, which makes the popularity of YouTube creators an important topic when it comes to commerce and the future of marketing. In addition, since teens have an average of 7 hours of screen time daily and rank online videos first in preferred media activities (as detailed in a report by the Washington Post, https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2019/10/29/survey-average-time-young-people-spend-watching-videos-mostly-youtube-has-doubled-since/#:~:text=Tweens%2C%20teens%20and%20screens%3A%20The,has%20doubled%20in%204%20years&text=More%20than%20twice%20as%20many,to%20an%20hour%20each%20day.), online video platforms like YouTube will likely become even more influential in the future. This report aims to explore factors that may be associated with YouTube popularity, which may help potential advertisers in understanding what sorts of creators they should partner with as well as provide advice to those wishing to become famous on YouTube.
Data
Our information was collected from 1,259 YouTube channels on December 31, 2018 by Social Blade.
We will focus on average views per video as a measure of popularity for each channel. Views per video measures the average number of times each video a channel produced was viewed, so it is a measurement of the actual engagement that a channel has for its content and is thus a good metric for popularity. The mean for this variable was 2,960,682.06 views/video and the standard deviation was 8,332,162.23 views/video. As seen in graph 1, the distribution of average views/video is strongly left skewed and unimodal. The graph has been zoomed in to focus on the modes and to eliminate outliers.
We will also examine the category, subscribers, and average videos per week associated with each channel. The category of each channel is a categorical variable that describes the type of content it produces: entertainment, music, sports, lifestyle, education, news & politics, film & animation, gaming, or comedy. The most popular category was entertainment, making up 41.1% of channels with 517 channels total, and the least popular was sports, making up 1.8% of channels with 23 channels total. The subscribers of a channel describes the number of people subscribed to each channel. The average videos per week of a channel describes the average number of videos released each week. The mean for this variable was 14.019 videos/week and the standard deviation was 43.215 videos/week. Both subscribers and average videos per week are unimodal and have strongly left skewed distributions, as seen in graphs 3 and 4. Both graphs have been zoomed in to focus on the modes and eliminate outliers.
Research Scenarios
Our first research question is whether average views/video is associated with the category of a channel. Since each category tends to have different demographics of viewers, it seems reasonable to assume that the category of a channel will determine its popularity. Table 2 summarizes the average views per video by category.
From the table above, we can see some significant variation in average views/video by category. The News & Politics category seems to receive the lowest average views/video by a significant margin, as it is the only category have a mean of under 1 million, though it also has the lowest standard deviation. Music seems receive the highest average views/video by a significant margin, followed by Education and Comedy.
We graphically explore the relationship between average views/video and category in graph 5, which displays side by side boxplots of the data. The graph has been zoomed in to better display the plots.
From the boxplots above, we see that comedy, education, and music all tend to receive the highest average views/video, though all three categories also have the widest range. Gaming and News & Politics tend to receive the lowest average views/video and have small ranges, though gaming has some high outliers. Several other categories also appear to have high outliers. In fact, a zoomed out graph 6 will show that Music has the highest outliers, followed by Education and Entertainment. Graph 6 also explains the high variation found. Most of the categories have outliers that are much higher than the rest of the data.
Overall, however, the boxplots are dissimilar enough that we have evidence that there is a relationship between categories and average views/video, though it should be noted that each category also contains a handful of more popular channels whose average views/video is much higher than average, leading to a large variation.
Our second research question is whether there is a relationship between average views/video and subscribers. Since subscribers are notified of new videos uploaded by a channel, it seems reasonable to assume that a higher number of subscribers is associated with a higher average views/week.
To investigate, we build a scatterplot to examine the data, seen in graph 7.
In graph 7, we plot subscribers against average videos/week against average views/video. A linear regression line is shown, but the relationship does not appear to be linear.There is very little correlation between the two variables, as seen in Table 4 below. Indeed, the regression model shown seems to poorly estimate the scatterplot due to a high number of outliers.
Our third research question is whether there is a relationship between average views/video and average videos/week. More videos/week mean that a channel has more chances to become successful, since the algorithm that YouTube uses to recommend videos to users favors channels that upload frequently. Thus, it seems reasonable to suspect that a higher average videos/week is associated with a higher average views/video.
To investigate, we build a scatterplot to examine the data, seen in graph 8.
In graph 8, we plot average videos/week against average videos/week against average views/video. Two regression lines, a linear fit and a smoothed fit, are shown. The graph shows that there is a strong right skewness to the data, but the relationship does not appear to be linear. Instead, the smoothed fit seems to indicate some non-linear regression may work better for this graph. However, if evaluating from a linear regression, there is very little correlation between the two variables, as seen in Table 4 below. Indeed, the regression model shown seems to poorly estimate the scatterplot due to a high number of outliers.
Discussion
Overall, we found that there appears to be a strong relationship between average views/video and category of a channel. However, there does not appear to be strong relationship between average views/video and average videos/week or between average views/video and average videos/week, which was surprising since subscriber count is often cited as a measure of YouTube popularity and video upload frequency is supposed to boost channel performance in the YouTube algorithm. Perhaps one contributing factor to this is the fact that many of the channels studied within this report were run by companies, not individuals, and focus on a variety of content rather than the more focused content found on channels run by individuals. Thus, these company channels will have many subscribers and upload frequently, but not every video will be well received by their userbase. It would be interesting to study the difference between company channels and ones owned by individuals or small groups of people.
Overall, our analysis can help people understand how popularity on YouTube may be acheived and how different categories of channels may be better able to spread advertisements.
