The NFL is the most popular professional sports league in America. Its viewership is over double that of any other professional sports organization in our country (according to storytell.com). Sundays from the beginning of September to the beginning of February are filled with millions of eager fans and bettors watching hours worth of their favorite players and teams. This heavy investment in the success of NFL teams by spectators creates an added interest into what components of the game allows a team to be successful. To analyze this, we will look into the quarterback position. Many consider this position the most valuable to a team as the quarterback is the signal caller, the coach on the field, and the man with the ball in his hand every play. Our goal in this report is to better understand the analytical measures for the quarterback position and how they demonstrate a QBs level of play. By having a better understanding of these key measures, spectators, fantasy football owners, and bettors can improve their knowledge of the game and perform better on their investments.
We have data compiled on the passing performances of every NFL player from 2009 through the end of the regular season in 2018. The data was collected as a portion of the nflscrapR package, which is an R studio resource that utilizes NFL data, by Ron Yurko.
We will cover a wide scope of metrics in the study, but our research questions in the next section will focus heavily on the variable, TDs. TD is the abbreviation for touchdowns thrown and the variable is a quantitative measure that accounts for how many touchdowns a QB is responsible for. Touchdowns do not account for everything, but the goal of football is to score touchdowns, so measuring a metric that is essential to the game of football is a strong starting point. The mean touchdown number was 1.942, with a standard deviation of 1.035.
Additionally, we will look into the quantitative variable, completion rate, which is essential in determining if the passer is consistent in his throws. This tells us that the passer is efficient because he can throw catchable balls to his receiver. We will also look into the data for another quantitative variable, times hit, which can have an affect on the quarterback's performance if they are getting pressured every throw. The mean for times hit from the data set was 2.503 and the standard deviation was 2.058. Lastly, we will look into the categorical variable of NFL teams. This will give us an idea of who throws TDs and who wins.
The first question in our analysis will be to describe the distribution of TDs thrown by QBs. Additionally, we will question the relationship between these TDs thrown and the team they play for.
Using the data from the previous section, our hypothesis suggests that the amount of TDs thrown with the highest frequency is a small amount. A reasonable hypothesis would be 2 TDs thrown, especially considering that it was the mean of that dataset. For the second part of the question, we will use prior evidence to hypothesize that teams that have won many games in the past decade will have the most touchdowns thrown.
We observe in figure 1.1 that the highest frequency of TDs thrown is 1 TD per game. This is the mode of the distribution. The histogram shows that the frequencies decrease as the TDs thrown increases, so the next highest frequency is at 2 TDs thrown, followed by 3 TDs thrown and so on.
The distribution has a few outliers towards the 6-8 TDs thrown range and it is right-skewed.
To further explain the distribution, the average number of TDs thrown is 1.942 and the standard deviation is slightly over 1 touchdown. The median of the distribution is slightly more than the mean at 2 touchdowns. This supports our hypothesis of two TDs thrown, but it is not the same. The median is the fiftieth percentile, while we were looking for the TD number with the highest frequency. So, our hypothesis is extremely close, but it is not correct. The minimum and maximum values, as apparent by the distribution are 1 TD and 8 TDs. The first and third quartile TDs thrown are 1 TD and 3 TDs respectively.
To expand on the first part of this question, we looked into the average TDs thrown by six specific NFL teams. This takes the research past surface level and into subtypes. We chose six teams to represent the visualization below. These teams were chosen as the three teams with the highest highest and 3 of the bottom five teams with the lowest average.
We want to use TDs as a basis to show fans, fantasy football owners, and bettors that TDs are the most important metric. This is proven by the dataset below. This is because the teams that have been most successful in the past decade have also thrown the most touchdowns. Additionally, these teams have had presumptive first-ballot hall of famers as quarterbacks for the entirety of the testing window. If you are unsure what that means, the quarterbacks for the New England Patriots, Green Bay Packers, and New Orleans Saints are up there with the best to ever play the game. Conversely, the other three teams in the dataset with a significantly lower amount of TDs thrown have struggled in the past decade. They have all struggled to win games and their quarterbacks have varied over the best decade and have not been desirable fantasy pickups.
From the bar chart in figure 1.2, we observe that Cleveland, Miami, and the New York Jets all average less than 2 TDs thrown per game. The chart also shows New England, Green Bay, and New Orleans with over 2 TDs thrown per game. This may not seem like a big difference, but points can be scarce in football and one TD can make all the difference.
Overall, the hypothesis for this dataset is accurate. Teams that win games also throw for more TDs than teams that lose games. This proves how valuable TD passes are in the NFL.
Our second research question is to assess the relationship between TDs thrown and times hit.
It seems like a reasonable hypothesis would be to suspect that the more a quarterback gets hit, the less TDs he throws. If he is getting hit, it is harder to make throws than it would be standing in an empty pocket with no pressure on him. Additionally, it is in the interest of every head coach in the NFL to keep their starting quarterback healthy. If he is getting hit, they will likely switch to running the ball to keep their quarterback safe.
From the bar chart in figure 2, we notice that the data is relatively consistent across times hit. There is a somewhat substantial increase in TDs thrown when the quarterback is hit 11-13 times. The rest of the data is similar though.
It seems as though times hit have little effect on the quarterbacks’ TDs thrown. With little change in the data, we can assume that other factors drive TDs thrown. Therefore, our hypothesis is incorrect. In this dataset, when a quarterback gets hit more, he also throws more TDs. This does not make sense because getting hit does not actively help a quarterback. Instead, if he is getting hit more, he is also probably dropping back to throw the ball more. Thus, he has more opportunity to throw TDs.
Our final research question is to determine if TDs thrown is associated with completion percentage.
It seems reasonable to hypothesize that a higher completion percentage will result in more TDs thrown because a more accurate quarterback will likely be a more successful quarterback.
We first created a table to show the average completion percentage and the standard deviation for each amount of TDs thrown.
From table 3, we see that there is a steadily increasing completion percentage with TDs thrown. This is very consistent across the dataset and the standard deviation is also similar.
Below, we will use a box plot to further visualize the connection between completion percentage and TDs thrown.
From figure 2, we can confirm that TDs thrown increases as the median completion percentage increases. Additionally, there are more outliers and greater variation with less TDs thrown. This is likely due to the frequency being greater with less TDs thrown. Overall, we can conclude that there is a positive relationship between TDs thrown and completion percentage. This confirms our hypothesis.
The data used for our research was a set of various different measurements that highlight quarterback play. The sample consisted of every quarterback's gameplay from 2009 through the end of the regular season in 2018.
Overall, we noticed that TDs thrown have higher frequencies at smaller values (1 TD thrown has the highest frequency). From this, we did a quick analysis into TDs thrown by teams, to help bettors and fantasy owners see that the more successful teams often have better quarterbacks that throw more touchdowns. To further these points, we looked into the times that quarterbacks got hit and how many TDs they threw. We concluded that this is not a good metric for sports bettors and fantasy owners to use to determine if a quarterback is a good fit. Additionally, fans should not worry a large amount about quarterback performance if their quarterback is getting hit. Lastly, we looked at completion percentage and touchdowns thrown. With a greater completion percentage, quarterbacks tend to throw more TDs. Therefore, bettors and fantasy owners should go with efficient quarterbacks. This means the quarterback can complete passes at a high and effective rate. This report was a good starting point to determine which quarterbacks to invest in, but there is much more research that should be done to see what quarterbacks are best fit. Fans, bettors, and fantasy owners should be able to use this research as a baseline to their decisions, but future analysis should include a wider scope beyond touchdowns. Scoring touchdowns is the key to the game of football, but football is the ultimate team game. There is much more to it than TD passes, which is what makes it America’s most beloved sport.
