Heart Disease and Death
The vast number of people today who deal with some form of heart disease is an outrageous amount. New technology that allows us to treat these diseases makes it so far more dreadful and tragic when someone dies of such a preventable death. However there is a question that arises when looking at the data provided to us. That question is whether gender has any relationship with the total cost, amount of drugs taken, or whether there were complications.
The data that I will be looking at was collected by an insurance agency that was attempting to predict the cost incurred by people with coronary heart disease.
There are noticeably far more women than men that were studied which could lead to a skewing in the reading of the data if one is not careful. While there appears to be a skew towards men having more complications, complications occurred at similar relative frequencies.
For the difference in drugs prescribed there appears to be slight trend toward more women not having any drugs prescribed since they make a relatively larger portion of the first column total than the others. This could be accounted to the fact that the majority of the sample was women and there could be a larger sample that shows there is not such a high rate of returning. In other words the diseases could be far less deadly than is being lead to believe in the data.
Deciding wether there is a bias in assigning cost to either of the genders, there must be a large difference in the median cost for each of the genders. This is because with such a large sample there would be a difference if a difference cost was given based on gender. I believe that there is a slight difference in the average cost with women paying slightly more, because there are far more women that were included in the dataset.
Another research question that I would like to peruse would be the difference in the amount of drugs that each of the genders are prescribed. This is because I have an inclination that women have a much higher rate of being prescribed any sort of medication, for the idea of a strong silent type might be far more pervasive for older people. This might mean that some men who are in pain do not say anything to anyone and suffer in silence while the women let the doctors know.
There appears to be no difference in the amount of medication prescribed given the gender of the subject. I say this because the consistent proportion of men and women in each of the categories show that there is little difference in the two genders. This is surprising since I noticed that a lot of the data set was in the older age range, which is more likely inferred since heart diseases notoriously inflect the old at far greater rates than those who are young. Because the relative frequency in each of the categories remains around 70%, there can not be too much bias in the amount of drugs taken.
The final research scenario that I was curious about was whether there is a relationship between the genders and having complications after intervention. I do not believe that there is a significant relationship between these two variables since I think that both genders often fail to take the preventative measures at similar rates.
Looking at this contingency table it appears as though men have a slightly higher chance of developing complications. This could be because men might have a harder time making adjustments to their lifestyles, or this is simple because there were far more women than men. I believe that it appears as though men have a higher chance of developing complications because they are making up a greater percent of yes column than they should, considering the sample distribution.
After combing through the data it appears as though gender has a very limited influence on the outcome of a heart disease subject. This might be indicative of a trend towards disassociating with sexism in the workplace. A limit that I definitely faced was that there was a enormous gap between the number of women and men who were selected. This should not have happened when the sample size is so large, since there is about the same amount of men and women who exist in the world. However, this might indicate that there is a bias towards accepting women as customers by this insurance company. Another thing that I would like to look into would be the relationship between weight, gender, and the previously looked at variables. This is because those who are overweight are far more likely to develop any negative health condition.
