Introduction:
YouTube is one of the most popular websites globally. Not only individuals go on the website to view videos, but many also go to post their own content. While many YouTubers manage to reach a wider audience, some struggle to do the same. Some contributors to this can be the category of videos and whether or not many viewers around the globe are interested in those categories as well as the number of videos the YouTuber uploads. Our goal is to try to understand what leads a channel to be popular on YouTube through a measure of the number of subscribers.
Data:
We have information on a sample of 1259 YouTube channels from December 31st, 2018, gathered by Social Blade, a website that provides analytics and tracks information for specific channels.
Our main focus will be on the subscriber variable for each channel, which is a quantitative variable indicating how many accounts are subscribed to a specific channel. The mean number of subscribers for the sample data is 3201758, and the standard deviation of the number of subscribers in the sample is 3556605, as indicated by the table below.
Our research questions will also consider the number of videos uploaded by each channel and the category of the channel. The variable videoUploads is a quantitative variable indicating the number of videos a channel has uploaded on YouTube. The mean number of uploads per channel for the sample is 4460 and the standard deviation of the number of uploads for each channel for the sample is 13608. The variable category is a user-defined variable indicating what kind of videos the channel produces. From the sample data, we see 9 different categories of YouTube channels, differing in popularity as indicated by the Bar Chart below.
Here we see that according to the sample data, the most common channel category on YouTube is entertainment, with 517 channels in the category, while the least common is Sports, with only 23 channels.
The first question considers the categorization of the distribution of YouTube subscribers. Based on the number of YouTube stars in comparison to the number of YouTube channels, we hypothesize that most channels would have fewer subscribers (less than 1 million) and a few will have many subscribers (over 10 million).
After looking at the histogram below, we can see that most of the channels have fewer subscribers (1 million and less). The mode value is at 1-1.5 million subscribers (with 202 channels). This can be because these channels get the attention of people with very specific interests that are different from one another but not certainly popular amongst the larger population. A possible route for future research would be to investigate this section of the subscriber’s distribution and identify the cause for this peak; the differences in interest could be due to different channel categories, different filming styles, or filming in different cultures/environments.
To further describe the distribution of YouTube channel subscribers, let us consider the median and the interquartile range. The median for the number of subscribers for a channel on YouTube for the sample is 1949612 while the first quartile value is 1080841, which means that only 25% of the channels have subscribers below this value. So, my hypothesis of most channels having below 1 million subscribers can be proved to be inaccurate (even though quite close to the outcome) as it is not strongly supported by the sample data analysis.
The next research question is to identify the relationship between the number of videos uploaded by a channel and its number of subscribers if it exists.
Even though viewers like YouTubers to post often and keep them entertained, some viewers may find it annoying if a channel posts too much content as they may find it difficult to keep up and hence, may not subscribe to the channel. I believe that there would be a weak positive relationship between the number of video uploads and the number of subscribers.
After looking at the histogram below, we see that the correlation coefficient is 0.0001 (as indicated by the regression model below) which is almost a 0, meaning that there is almost no relationship between the number of Video uploads and the number of subscribers. I believe this may be because other factors also play a part in determining whether one subscribes to a channel or not. These factors may include the quality of the content and how interested one is in the topic of the videos.
In addition, it is important to note the skewness of the scatterplot that tails to the right. It shows that most channels, no matter the number of subscribers, have less than 10000 videos uploaded on their channel. Most of the points on the scatter plot are, in this case, labeled as anomalies which can affect the accuracy of the overall analysis.
Our last research question is to investigate whether or not the number of subscribers on YouTube channels is associated with the Channel category. Since different people like different things (which is one of the factors that individualizes us), we could hypothesize that the number of subscribers is dependent on the channel category. Furthermore, another fact to support this hypothesis is the fact that if a category is trending, the channels with the categories are likely to be more viewed and hence have a higher chance of having more subscribers.
To compare the subscribers per YouTube channel categories, I formed boxplots for a separate category. Looking at this plot below, we can see that even though the max values are the highest for the entertainment category, the median, as well as the upper quartile, is the highest for the comedy category with values of 2.94 million and 5.44 million subjectively.
Discussion:
Our analysis focused on YouTube subscribers for a sample data set of 1259 YouTube channels in the year 2018. We analyzed subscribers based on the channel number of videos uploaded as well as the channel’s user-defined category. From this analysis, we found that most of the channels have 1-1.5 million subscribers. We did not find a relationship between the number of video uploads and the number of subscribers due to some variation and a correlation coefficient of almost 0 (which was a bit surprising). We also did not find a strong relationship between the number of subscribers and the channel category. So, overall from this analysis, we found that the number of videos a channel uploads or the category of the channel has to relate to the number of subscribers the channel has.
However, this analysis does have some limitations that may question the accuracy of the analysis. For example, for the second research question, we assumed that all videos uploaded by a channel were public. Some videos can be published privately which means they will not be available to be viewed by many viewers and so they will not have any effect on the number of subscribers. Furthermore, under the second research question, we based our scatter plot on a linear regression model which may not have accurately fitted the data set. In that case, using a different model may have been more useful. As well as considering these points, the future analysis might also consider other factors that might lead one channel to have more subscribers than others, such as the age of the channel.
Overall, our analysis will help YouTubers understand what aims to make or not to make to affect the number of viewers and subscribers for their YouTube channel.
