Back in the early 2000s, the word “Youtuber“ would not make sense to most people. Fast forward 20 years, Youtuber has become a legit profession, with some Youtuber making millions of dollars every year. Founded in 2005, within just 15 years Youtube has revolutionized how videos are created and distributed on the internet. Today, Youtube is the second most-viewed website, just behind Google Search, according to Alexa internet rankings. There are thousands of content creators on the platform, and some of them have millions of followers. Youtube is a platform where creators can easily share their content with their fans, and generate instant feedback, such as the number of views and likes. Even though Youtube was established in North America, now it has users and content creators from all over the world. The goal for our current work is to try to better understand how the content on Youtube differs from continent to continent, and try to find any indicator on the difference in media culture. This work could be helpful to give Youtube some insights into its cultural influence.
We have information on a sample of 1259 Youtube Channels. We have categorical variables such as continent and country, which identify where the Youtube Channel is located. We also have quantitative variables such as view, view per video, subscribers, video uploads which are metrics to assess the popularity of the Youtube Channel.
Our primary focus of categorical variables is on the continent. As demonstrated by the table below, out of all the continents, the Americas have the most Youtube channels at 634, which is almost 40 times more than that of Africa. However, the median of subscribers of Youtube Channel from each continent is very comparable. The standard deviations are also generally similar, with the exception of Africa which has a standard deviation much higher than the rest of the continents.
Our primary focus of quantitative variables is on the variables views per video and subscribers. While they are both metrics to evaluate the popularity of Youtube Channels, there is a difference between these two variables. A Youtube Channel could be a “one-hit-wonder“, and have very few subscribers but very high views per video. This phenomenon is demonstrated with the box graph shown below. The max for subscribers for each continent is about 10 times more than average, while views per video can be 200 times.
Our first question is if the popularity of a certain category of Youtube channels will differ from continent to continent. For example, will sports-related Youtube channels be more popular in America since the sports industry is bigger there? Our hypothesis is that a continent’s culture will reflect on the popularity of categories of Youtube channels. For example, the sports category might be particularly well received in America, since America has strong sports culture. We specifically look at the proportion of categories in terms of the number of Youtube channels. The reason for not using views as a metric to determine the popularity of a specific category in a continent is because it could be biased in the case of Youtube. For example, one trending video could contribute billions of views to that category. If many Youtube channels can survive and have popularity, that indicates the popularity of that category in this continent in general. Here’s the frequency table:
The count of this table is the amount of Youtube channels corresponding with each category. Our first observation is that for the 3 continents with plenty of sample sizes (America, Asia, and Europe), the proportion of each category is roughly the same. They have entertainment as their most common category of Youtube channels, but there are some minor differences that catch our attention. Asia’s sports Youtube channels are extremely few, with only 2 channels that take up only 0.5% of the total channels. Asia also has the highest proportion in terms of music at near 25%, which is not surprising considering the rise of Kpop and its music video production. However, we cannot conclude if there’s a significant difference in terms of the distribution of Youtube channels.
Characterize the account age of Youtube channels across continents to explore Youtube’s influence
Our second question is does account age correlate to the views and subscribers? If so, since Youtube was established in America and was spread around the world, will it have less influence on other continents that were later introduced to Youtube? Our hypothesis is that longer the account age, the more subscribers they will have. Some continents might have a lower account age on average, thus Youtube’s influence might not be as big in those continents as a result. We first look at the relationship between age of the account and the subscribers (a key indicator of a channel’s influence):
To our surprises, there is no clear linear pattern in the scatter plot, and the linear regression model shows that there is no clear correlation between these subscribers and account age. This is surprising because we expect that it takes time for Youtubers to expand their business. We can gain some insights to the business model of Youtubers. Their subscribers could explode after 1 trending videos, attracting public’s attention. However, they could reach a plateau after some period of time, and there’s no linear relationship between the account’s age and its influence. Now let’s look into a distribution of account age across each continent:
Our third question is what the Youtubers’ distribution in terms of views is like across all continents. I’m expecting to see a normal distribution across all continents. There are definitely some extremely popular channels that could have billions of total views, but since people have many interests, smaller Youtube channels definitely still have the space to prosper. This situation could vary across continents though. In Asian culture, for example, since people are more used to a more centralized media, the distribution could tend to be top-heavy. This is a particularly interesting question, because many children nowadays inspire to become Youtuber some day, some of the being attracted to the high salaries that the top Youtuber make. This question should provide some insights for people who want to become a Youtuber, because the financial reward of a Youtuber is closely related to the amount views they get. Here is a histogram of views across continents:
As we can see, the distribution is also very skewed to the left, with more than half of the Youtube channels that attracted less than 2.5 million views per week. According to statistics online, each view on Youtube video accounts to about $0.01 per view, so more than half of Youtube channels of makes less than 2 million dollars a year in this data, no matter which continent the channel is located, without considering the cost of making the video. It is still a considerable amount of money, but the data is suggesting that anyone who wants to quit their job and starts a new Youtube career needs to make decisions very carefully.
Our analysis mainly focused on the influence of Youtube with emphasis on its difference across continents. The result that we found is that each continent exhinit more similarities than differences. All the continents seem to have similar distribution of contents, account age and views over time. One of the biggest limitation of our analysis is the dataset only includes big Youtubers. There are thounsands of Youtube channels with far less subscribers and views, but they are upcoming and will have huge impact on the landscape of Youtube. The business of video creating is very competitve, and it’s hard to predict which channels will become the new stars on this platform. We might ask for more data on Youtube channels with smaller size, and do a similar analysis to see if there’s any difference across continents. But main takeaway of our analysis is the globalization of content creation. Every continents are exhibiting same business pattern and it seems that Youtube is taking over the globe.
