Introduction:
As the climate crisis continues to become everpresent, wildfire frequency has all but decreased in recent years. Many variables play a part in the increase, although those directly related to shifts in environmental stability have played a large role (as reported by National Geographic, September 17, 2020: https://www.nationalgeographic.com/science/article/climate-change-increases-risk-fires-western-us). “Increasing heat, changing rain and snow patterns, shifts in plant communities, and other climate-related changes have vastly increased the likelihood that fires will start more often and burn more intensely and widely than they have in the past.” The goal of the current work is to examine how factors exacerbated by climate change form ideal fire conditions throughout the year.
Data:
The data included is on 517 forest fires located in the United States.
Any graphical summaries are made within the ISLE Toolbox, and any tables were made in an external spreadsheet.
The focus will be on the quantitative variable Drought Code (DC). This represents drying deep into the soil. It approximates moisture conditions for the equivalent of 53-day (1272 hour) time-lag fuels. In addition to Drought Code, Month, and Wind will be explored in relationship to each other and to Drought Code.
Drought Code Dependent on X-axis Coordinates
The first research question is to understand how the Drought Code varies between forest fires as their X-axis coordinate takes us from West to East. Within our data, X-coordinates are organized into nine different groups, with values ranging between 1 and 9.
Due to the Western United States typically being a dryer climate, we will hypothesize that forest fires with an X-coordinate value of less than 3 will have a median Drought Code value higher than 500, while X-coordinate values 4 through 9 will have a median Drought Code lower than 500.
By looking at Drought Code given the X-coordinate (figure 1, below) we can see that most X-coordinate values have a median Drought Code just below 700. This data contradicts our hypothesis of only X-coordinate values 1 through 3 having a median Drought Code higher than 500. Although, a trend that we can see is that for the X-coordinate values 1 and 2, the first quartile is around 600, which begins to suggest that the further West in the United States, the higher the Drought Code value tends to be. While this downward trend of the first quartile holds true for the first three X-coordinate values, this is not the case for the rest, as their first quartile values vary greatly and show no increasing or decreasing trend.
While our hypothesis was not explicitly correct, we were correct in assuming that more firest fires might occur in the Western United States. With only the variable of X-coordinate being examined, we can’t infer any other connection than the geographic effect on relative humidity. In addition to this, we do not take into account the Y-coordinate of any particular location, so as humidity may decrease the further West you move along the United States, it will also decrease the further South you move, so this can explain the large maximums and small minimums for every X-coordinate value.
Our next research question is to look into how the month affects Drought Code throughout the year.
Regardless of location within the United States, the climate will change regularly as the seasons pass, calling for a varying Drought Code. We hypothesize that starting in January and moving throughout the year, the median Drought Code will increase, peaking around August or September, and then decreasing throughout the end of the year.
We can see that the median Drought code in January is 90.35 (Table 1, below) and that despite the slight drop in February, continues to increase until peaking in September at 728.6. the Drought Code then quickly decreases, ending the year at 349 in December. Seeing as the peaking median Drought Code is in the month of September, the analyzed data supports our hypothesis.
We then graphically explored the Drought Code throughout the year (Figure 2, below), and can note that there is an exponential increase from January until September. While we have not investigated the relationship between Month and other quantitative variables, we could assume that during the months of August through October, there are more forest fires strictly due to Drought Code than other variables.
Wind Dependant on Month
Our third research question is to investigate how wind is dependant on month, and to understand whether or not months with higher wind speeds overlap with months of high Drought Codes.
We hypothesize that the months with higher median wind speeds will be between November and January.
In our graphical summary (Figure 3, below) we note that the highest median wind speed is in December at 8.5 km/h. This somewhat supports our hypothesis, although the next highest median wind speeds are not all within the range from November to January. The next five highest median wind speeds are as follows: 5.15 (March), 4.5 (April), 4.5 (June), 4.5 (November), 4.45 (May). As we can see, the median wind speeds vary throughout the year, however the maximum and minimums are larger during the months of February, March, and April than they are for the other months. So while the medians may not fall close to our hypothesized range, the average wind speed values tend to be higher during these months.
In comparison to the Drought Code given the month, the wind speed tends to be higher during months earlier in the year. There is an implied association between the end of Winter and the beginning of Spring, and higher wind speeds. This could mean that forest fires during these months are more driven by wind speeds than higher drought levels.
This analysis was a look into 517 forest fires in the United States and explored relationships between Drought Codes dependant on longitudinal location, and Drought Codes and wind speeds dependant on month of the year. We discovered that the forest fires that occurred in the Western United States did not have much higher median Drought Codes, although there appeared to be less variability as the minimum values were much larger than those found in the Eastern United States. When Drought Code and wind speed were dependant on the month of the year, we found that forest fires may occur more frequently due to higher Drought Codes during the months between August and October, and due to higher average wind speeds during the months between February and April.
In future analyses we may explore the possible relationships between both the X-coordinate and Y-coordinate, and Drought Codes to understand which specific regions tend to have drier climates. In addition to this, a look into average wind speeds and area of the firest fire would help understand whether or not some of these quantitative variables are connected to severity of the forest fires.
This data can be beneficial to understand the effects of the climate crisis and how variables associated with the creation of forest fires, when intensified, can add to the destruction of natural forests.
