Introduction: Youtube has become a staple of modern entertainment with its rise in the early 2000s. With the accessibility of technology to individuals in the United States, the majority of the United States population knows of and uses Youtube. Many would thus argue and hypothesize that Youtube is most popular in the United States. However, other countries have different levels of technological development. This begs the question if there are any other countries where Youtube is even more popular than the United States.
Dataset:
We have a random sample of 1,259 Youtube channels gathered from Social Blade till the end of 2018. The Youtube channels come from 20 countries.
The categorical variable ‘country’ is our primary focus as we are trying to compare the frequencies of mean total views, mean views per video, and mean subscribers between countries. We define Youtube popularity as countries with the most mean total views, mean views per video, and mean subscribers. We will assume that the United States excels and outshines other countries in all forms of Youtube popularity stated in the previous sentence. Given that ‘country’ is a categorical variable, bar charts with a mean summary function will be used for all graphs. Since we are looking for countries with more popularity for Youtube than the United States, any of the bar charts that have data higher than the United States is relevant data. As a quick summary, the average Youtube channel in the United States has 1.360359 billion mean total views, 3.914343 million mean views per video, and 3.406103 million mean subscribers.
Mean Total Views for Youtube Channels in Countries
A Youtuber’s total views indicate how many times people on the planet have clicked on or rewatched the videos that were made. An average Youtube channel in the United States has a total view count of 1.360359 billion views. Our first hypothesis is that the United States has more average total view counts than any other country. In order to check if this is true or not, we have the bar chart below:
From the chart, it can be seen that the United States places sixth in the average total views a channel receives. The five countries that surpass it are Korea (3.03737 billion), Thailand (2.211092 billion), Romania (1.962949 billion), Canada (1.881827 billion), and Great-Britain (1.765961 billion) respectively. While there are fourteen other countries that rank lower than the United States for this tally, it refutes the claim that the United States leads in Youtube total views and therefore in Youtube popularity.
Mean Views Per Video for Youtube Channels in Countries
In addition to mean total views per channel, another way to measure popularity of Youtube is through the mean views per video that a Youtuber influencer gets. While the previous chart provided a general gist of the complete viewership a country gets, it did not take into consideration that the more an influencer uploads, the more views they will get overall. For example, if a content creator made 30,000 videos with five views each the total views would be 150,000 views despite the lack of fanbase. A content creator with one video and 100,000 views would be seen as less popular on Youtube based on the previous chart. To avoid this, we measure the mean views per video. The United States has 3.914343 million mean views per video. Under the main assumption that the United States leads in Youtube popularity, the expectation is that it beats any other country in mean views per video. This is illustrated in the bar chart below:
The United States places second here instead of sixth from before. The only country that surpasses the 3.914343 million United States figure is Egypt with 4.791751 million average views per video for its channels. Although the United States places second in this category, it still refutes the main claim that Youtube popularity is highest in the United States.
Mean Subscribers for Youtube Channels in Countries
The last form of measuring Youtube popularity that will be used is the subscription function on Youtube. A subscription to a channel means audience members are so engaged and love a channel that they are willing to receive constant notifications from the creator when the creator uploads. The United States has 3.406103 million mean subscribers. Under the assumption that Youtube popularity is highest in the United States, we expect the mean subscribers to be highest for United States Youtubers. To check this we look at a bar chart once again. Please note that due to an unfixable glitch on ISLE, the country axis is layered over each other and hard to read:
The United States ranks fourth in mean subscribers with 3.406103 million. Korea (4.892285 million), Canada (4.586531 million), and Great-Britain (3.96704 million) rank first, second, and third respectively. The United States is not ranked first in mean subscribers, meaning that the country is not the most Youtube popular in this regard.
Discussion:
From the three measurements of Youtube popularity that were looked at above, it is evident that the United States is not the most Youtube popular country. It ranks sixth, second, and fourth for mean total views, mean views per video, and mean subscribers respectively. However, it is important to mention limitations that the analysis had. First off, the populations of different countries were not considered. The higher a country's population, the more available people there are to have access to Youtube. A future experiment could take this into consideration and calculate results per capita. In addition, mean total views, mean views per video, and mean subscribers are not the only measures of Youtube popularity. Similar projects in the future can also consider the percentage of a video that people watch as not everyone finishes a Youtube video.
