Introduction:
When the defendants are judged to be guilty in court, they are expected to pay punitive damages to the plaintiff as a remedy for their misconduct. However, in recent years, public outcry arose with regard to the size of the damage paid to the plaintiff. Although it is commonly accepted that the defendant should pay damages, the current laws do not state the specific standards to calculate the amount of damages being paid. Thus, it is controversial to say what should be the appropriate amount of damages. (https://www.cpmlegal.com/publication-Punitive_Damages_How_Much_Is_Enough) This project is intended to analyze the existing problem in the distribution of damages and how the results of the analysis may help to relieve the problem.
Data:
The sample includes information about 1836 trials that are related to tort, contract, or real property rights trials. The data is collected from the National Center for State Courts and is later used by the Bureau of Statistics for analysis.
The primary focus of this study will be about total damages, a quantitative variable that measures the amount of damages the plaintiff received as a result of their trial. The mean of total damages is about 213101.43 dollars with a standard deviation of 7795.00. The three scenarios in the next section will also include the variable Demanded and ClaimType. The variable Demanded is a quantitative variable that measures the amount a plaintiff requested from court. The mean value demanded is about 1029742.66 dollars and the standard deviation for Demanded is 60286.50. Also, there is a categorical variable named ClaimType that states the type of claim the plaintiff made. Out of the total 1836 trials, the most common type is ‘Other’ (917 cases). These cases do not belong to listed categories such as malpractice, motor vehicle, fraud, premises liability or rental/lease. The least common type of claim is rental/leason, which only includes 92 cases out of 1836 cases.
The first scenarios would analyze the distribution of total damages paid to plaintiffs. Based on recent public outcry for the size of damages awarded, it indicates that the distribution of total damages would be unevenly distributed since some plaintiffs received large amounts of damages while others only received a small amount of damages. So, the hypothesized shape for the distribution would be non-symmetric and skewed.
Although Figure 2 shows a mode in the $277,657-$500,000 range, its count (62, according to isle) becomes relatively insignificant compared to the mode of Figure 1 in the range $0-$2500 (766, according isle). So when the two graphs are combined to form an entire distribution from 0 to $44,968,563 (max), the primary mode should be in the range $0-$2500.
In addition, the mean for the distribution of total damages is about $213101.43 and the median is $ 7795.00. The difference between the mean and the median suggests that the graph should be skewed to the right since the median is much smaller than the mean. Also, the standard deviation is 1837561.611 and such a large value indicates that there should be quite a few outliers in this data set.
The second scenario would examine whether there is a relationship between Total Damages and Damages Demanded. It seems reasonable to hypothesize that higher demanded damages are associated with higher total damages paid. When a plaintiff is successful in court, the judge would rule in the plaintiff’s favor. So when the plaintiff demands a specific amount and is successful, it is highly possible that the judge decides the amount of total damages based on that demand.
In Figure 3 shown above, it indicates that there’s a weak relationship between TotalDamages and Demanded Damages. The data is right skewed in which most of the data points form clusters near zero. The trend seems to be linear around 0 to 5M and the density of data points around that location is high. But as TotalDamages increased to 10M, there’s no clear pattern for the data points so it is difficult to predict whether there’s a relationship between the two variables. A great number of data points are distant away from the linear fit line and there are a few outliers in the data. In addition, the correlation coefficient for total damages vs. demanded is only 0.275. It is much smaller than 1 and this relatively small coefficient suggests a relatively weak correlation between the two variables.
The third scenario would investigate whether the amount of total damages is related to the claim type. The purpose of this analysis is to see whether there is any claim type that received significantly higher damages compared to other types of claim. It seems reasonable to predict that cases like fraud that directly involve money may have higher total damage as a remedy to the financial loss of plaintiff.
According to Table 2, plaintiffs that claim fraud tend to have higher total damages in average compared to other types of claim. The mean and median values of total damages of the fraud category are both higher than others. For claims about malpractice or premises liability, there would be quite a few outliers in the data set since the mean is exceedingly greater than the median. Among the six types, rental/lease-related claims receive the least amount of damages on average. In general, all six claims show large gaps between the median and mean, which implies that the data points are not evenly distributed and there would be outliers.
According to the boxplot, it also suggests that plaintiffs that claim fraud-related cases received more damages in remedy as indicated by the higher median on the box plot. Also, all claims except rental/lease have a boxplot that is comparatively long. It signifies that the data points are widely distributed and are not close to each other. In addition, ‘motor vehicle’, ‘premises liability’, and ‘other’ all illustrate a great number of outliers in the data set.
Discussion:
The analysis focused on the distribution of total damages for plaintiffs for a sample of 1836 cases and examined the potential relationship with demanded damages, and type of claim. Overall, it is evident that the distribution of damages for each plaintiff is uneven, which means that some plaintiffs received extremely high damages while others received little to no damages. The majority of plaintiffs received damages that are less than 100000 dollars and many of them received 0 dollars. Also, there are quite a few significant outliers in the data set that cause the mean to be high even though hundreds of plaintiffs received $0. The scatter plot did not show a strong relationship between TotalDamages and Demanded damages due to large variation in values for each damage. For claim type analysis, it suggests that those who claim fraud may receive higher amounts of damages compared to others since it has the highest mean and median for TotalDamages. But in general, it also indicates that there are large variations in the amount of damages that cause the data to be widely distributed. One problem with the data is that too many claims belong to the ‘other’ category without knowing the exact composition of ‘other’. It would be better if the components for the ‘other’ category can be specified because it may help to generate a better understanding for the relationship between ClaimType and TotalDamages. For further research, data analysts can look into how BodyInjury impacts the amount to TotalDamages because it is possible that those who have body injuries can receive more damages for medical reasons. Also, the data can look into what cause the fraud category to have more damages than others and what cause many plaintiffs received 0 dollars in remedy.
Overall, the analysis helps people to realize the uneven distribution of damages among plaintiffs and whether the amount of damages they demanded may affect the judge’s decision.
