Introduction
The American Medical System has a systemic pattern of exponentially high costs, which affects everyone as we age and need medical assistance. Currently, heart disease is the most expensive disease in the United States, and will only continue to grow in price (as detailed, for instance, in Science Daily, Feb. 14th, 2017: https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2017/02/1702 14162750.htm#:~:text=Currently%2C%20cardiovascular%20disease%20is%20the,will%20be%20in%20the%20trillions.). It is essential to understand this economic burden of cost associated with heart disease, and how that corresponds to our elderly population. Elderly individuals are increasingly stressed in how to pay for their treatment, especially as costs rise (as detailed, for instance, in Gallup, April 15th, 2019: https://news.gallup.com/opinion/ gallup/248741/seniors-pay-billions-yet-cannot-afford-healthcare.aspx). It is vital to understand how the high cost of treatment for heart disease affects the most vulnerable of our community.
Data:
We will be using information from a sample collected during the period of January 1998 through December 1999, from 788 subscribers.
The primary focus of this project will be on Cost, a quantitative variable that represents the cost of the heart disease treatment of each individual in the sample, measured in dollars.The mean cost was 2,799.956 dollars and the standard deviation was 6,690.260 dollars.
Our research questions [stated in the next section] will involve Cost and ERVisits. The variable of Age, a quantitative variable which measures the age of subscribers with heart disease (measured in years). The mean age was 58.718 and the standard deviation was 6.754 years. The variable of ERVisits is quantitative, measured in the number of times the individual in the sample had to visit the emergency room. The mean number of emergency room visits was 3.425 visits and the standard deviation was 2.637 visits.
Exploring the Cost of Heart Disease
Our first question explores the cost of having heart disease. According to the informal evidence, we hypothesize that the cost associated with having heart disease is relatively high, between 10k and 40k dollars.
Beginning with the histogram of Cost (figure 1, below), we observe that the majority of individuals in this sample had the cost of their heart disease treatments exist between the cost of zero dollars and ten thousand dollars. As the amount of cost of treatment increases, the number of individuals decreases.
The distribution of cost (seen below) shows one primary mode of zero dollars to 500 dollars, with 391 individuals having paid between zero and 500 dollars for their heart disease treatment. The histogram is incredibly skewed to the right (with a long right tail) and numerous amount of outliers, paying exponentially higher costs than the primary mode (around 18k, 40.5k, 46.5k, and 52.5k).
The interquartile range spans from a 25th percentile of 161.05 dollars to a 75th percentile of 1924.6 dollars. Since only 25% of individuals in this study paid over 1,924.6 dollars, we can conclude that the bills received are much less than we thought, and that our initial hypothesis is not supported by this data.
Higher Age Synonymous With Higher Costs
Our next research question is to investigate whether the higher an individual’s age is, the cost of their treatment will additionally be higher.
If we make a histogram of Age (seen below), we can clearly that an older individual is more likely to have heart disease. The histogram is skewed to the left, with a few noticeable outliers around 25 years and 30 years. The median age is 58.718 years old, a median age of 60 years, and a standard deviation of 6.754 years.
We will investigate the relationship between age and cost in the scatterplot, as shown in Figure 3, below:
Overall, we see this scatterplot negates the original hypothesis and shows there is no existing relationship between high age and high cost.
Higher Emergency Room Visits vs Higher Costs
Our third and final research question is to examine if an increased amount of emergency room visits would create a higher overall cost for the individual. As it costs money to be admitted into the emergency room and receive treatment, it seems fair to hypothesize that the higher amount of emergency room visits, the higher the total cost for the individual.
We will investigate the relationship between ERVisits and Cost in the scatterplot, Figure 4, below:
Discussion
Our analysis focused on the cost of heart disease treatments and examined its potential relationship with other quantitative variables: Age and ERVisits. Overall, we found that individuals with heart disease pay exponentially less than originally hypothesized, the majority of individuals paying between zero and 10,000 dollars, with the primary mode paying between 0 and 500 dollars for their treatment. There were a few potential outliers, where individuals paid much more than 10,000 dollars (around 40,000-50,000 dollars). We also examined the relationship with Cost and Age, to see if the age of the individual influenced the final cost of treatment. Despite the original hypothesis that it would, the data revealed that there was virtually no relationship between the two. Finally, we examined the relationship between the number of ER Visits and Cost, to see if the higher amount of ER visits created a high cost in total. While the number of emergency visits and cost did have a positive and linear relationship, the relationship was not strong enough to produce any usable conclusions.
There were many limitations with the data during this analysis. The main one being the year the study was performed: 1998 - 1999. Nearly two decades later, the Healthcare system has transformed monumentally. The cost of almost everything in our daily life has increased, from the cost of rent to the cost of a cup of coffee. Therefore, we believe the data of how much heart disease treatment costs would be much different if this study was performed today. Furthermore, we would also like to know where this study was performed and how the individuals in the sample were chosen. Both of these factors have the potential to greatly affect the outcome of the data.
Finally, if we believe there is great future for this study. As we live through a pandemic, it has become painfully clear that there are deep, systemic faults of the American Medical System. Currently, healthcare in the United States is the highest in the world (as detailed, for instance, in USAToday, Apr. 11th, 2019: https://www.usatoday.com/story/money/2019/04/11/countries-that-spend-the-most-on-public-health/39307147/). We believe that is beyond important to continue to measure the high cost of the American Medical System, and conclude if other factors (race, class, location), affect the final cost of treatment for heart disease. Especially since, as stated in the Introduction, heart disease is the most expensive medical treatment. It is our responsibility to ensure that the combination of the high cost of our medical system and the high cost of heart disease treatment do not punish vulnerable communities.
