Introduction:
Forest fires, one of the major contributors to economical and ecological damage. Some causes are natural (e.g. lightning); others are preventable (e.g. human negligence). In either case, fast detection is necessary. Once a fire has been detected and identified as having potential for excessive destruction, resources need to be deployed appropriately. Poor decisions can result in loss of life and greater damage (as indicated by the USDA’s research, https://www.fs.usda.gov/pnw/page/fire-effects-environment#:~:text=But%20fire%20can%20be%20deadly,landscape%20may%20be%20long%2Dlasting.). This study aims to better understand the causes of forest fires. From this, forest fires could potentially be better detected and managed.
The dataset came from a sample of forest fire data from the Montesinho park, located in the northeast region of Portugal. The timeframe of this data set was from January 2000 to December 2003.
The Fire Weather Index (FWI), as well as time, date, and spatial location of fires were recorded by an inspector at Montesinho park. Meteorological information was collected within a 30 minute time period of the fire occurring by a station located in the center of the park, run by the Braganca Polytechnic Institute.
Data:
The main variable of this paper will be the variable for the amount of land burned in a forest fire. This is a quantitative variable, measuring how much land in hectares was burned. The mean amount of area that was burned was 12.895 hectares and the standard deviation was 63.646 hectares.
Some of the other variables that we will include are the Initial Spread Index (ISI), the month, as well as the Fine Fuel Moisture Code (FFMC). The month with the most land area burned in hectares by forest fires was September, with 3093.63 hectares or 46.4% of the land burned. The month with the least amount of land burned by forest fires was November with only 0.1 hectare or 0.0015% of the land burned.
The ISI is a quantitative variable that measures the velocity of the fire’s spread. The mean velocity of fire spread at Montesinho park was 9.022, the fastest velocity was 56.100 and the slowest velocity was 0. The FFMC is also a quantitative variable that measures the moisture content surface litter, which influences ignition and fire spread. The code goes from 0-101, and from the data on Montesinho park, the least amount of fuel was 18.700, and the most amount of fuel was 96.200. The mean FFMC was 90.645.
Characterizing the Distribution of Land Area Burned:
For our first research scenario, we will be characterizing the distribution of land area burned. Based on the dataset description that Montesinho is very high in floral and fauna diversity, we hypothesize that there was a significant amount of land burned from each forest fire, approximately 80 hectares.
Looking at the histogram of area of land burned below, we can see that there is a mode of 0-10 hectares burned and that the data is skewed to the right, with multiple outliers 200, 700, and 1000 hectares.
The box plot below, provides further evidence that our position is not supported by the data by showing an interquartile range of 0.1 in the 25th percentile to 6.5725 in the 75th percentile. This means that only 75% of forest fires are burning below 6.5725 hectares of land, disproving our original position.
For our next research question, we will be examining whether the area of land burned from forest fires was associated with the month of the year.
It is known that factors such as temperature, air humidity, rainfall, and wind speed are known to be related to fire occurrence and spread. And as we know these meteorological conditions change through the year (because of seasons, different climate, etc.), so it would be reasonable to suggest a hypothesis that forest fires could potentially occur more often, in a given part of the year.
Looking at the table below, we can see that there is indeed an increase in the amount of land burned within the end of the summer and the beginning of the fall. Within that period, we can see that in the months of September from 2000 to 2003, there was a range of 1090.740 hectares and a mean of 17.986 hectares of land burned due to forest fires. This is a significant increase in the amount of land burned, compared to the rest of the year. For three years, September was the month in which forest fires burned the most land, consistently and at a significant number. From this we can say that there is indeed a relationship, in that there is an increase in area of land burned, during the end of the summer and beginning of fall, specifically within the month of September.
Relationship Between Initial Spread Index and Fine Fuel Moisture Code:
The third research question will investigate whether there is a relationship between the Initial Spread Index (ISI) and the Fine Fuel Moisture Code (FFMC).
Now, the forest fires within the Montesinho park can be analyzed in terms of velocity, which leads us to the ISI, or the velocity at which the fire spreads within the forest. If a fire spreads at a high velocity, the ISI score of that forest fire will be higher. The velocity at which the fire spreads depends on a number of factors, such as grass, fallen leaves, etc, which is measured through the FFMC. Because the Montesinho park has a high floral and fauna diversity, as well as dense vegetation, we can hypothesize that the more FFMC there is in the forest, the higher the ISI will be.
To start off, we will note that the mean ISI is 9.022 and for the FFMC is 90.645. Also, the standard deviation for ISI is 4.559 and for FFMC is 5.520. We then build a linear regression model between the ISI and the FFMC.
Looking at the plot below, we can see a left skewed dataset. We can also note that the relationship is not linear, as the smoothed fit line best fits the data points. So, linear regression models and correlation coefficients are not appropriate. Based on the smoothed fit line, the relationship is exponential.
In our investigation, we analyzed the amount of land burned by forest fires, Initial Spread Index (ISI) of the forest fires, the Month the fires took place, as well as the Fine Fuel Moisture Code (FFMC). These measurements took place between January 2000 to December 2003 and from these datasets, we looked for potential relationships between them. We found that on average, 12 hectares of land were burned by forest fires within that time frame. As for the relationship between the amount of land burned and the month, we found a strong relationship, where the most land burned is in the fall, especially during the month of September. We also saw a strong exponential relationship between the Initial Spread Index and the Fine Fuel Moisture Code, as expected. This relationship can explain why there was an increase in the amount of land burned during September, because of the increase in FFMC in the form of fallen leaves during the fall, which increased the spread velocity of the fire, or the ISI. For future analysis, we might include data on forest fires caused by human negligence; one of the main causes of forest fires.
Overall, our study on forest fires can help preserve the Montesinho park’s floral and fauna diversity from forest fires, by better planning for and hopefully, by potentially mitigating forest fires.
