Introduction
Youtube started in the early 2000s as an experimental, online dating service. Its founders intended to connect loveless singles across the globe by encouraging them to post videos explaining their personal lives and why they would be a good lover. At this point in history, Janet Jackson had an unintended wardrobe malfunction during the 2004 Super Bowl Halftime Show. Driven by their desire to relive this moment, Youtube’s founders Chad Hurley, Steve Chen, and Jawed Karim chose to pivot their dating service into one of the world’s first streaming platforms. Almost 15 years later their platform has grown into a multi billion dollar industry, sparking a new career path for Millennials and Gen-Zers; the Content Creator, the Youtuber, the Influencer.
Dataset
Prior to YouTube, entertainment targeted towards young audiences was delivered via television networks that were owned and operated by large corporations. Independent Influencers who voluntarily shared their lives on the internet dominated the platform in its early days. The landscape of videos that were available to users were deeply personal, niche, and candid. In the past few years the same entertainment companies that Youtubers were staling viewers from have come back full swing to take over the platform. Today we will focus on the quantitative and qualitative metrics of 1,259 unique Youtube channels, provided Social Blade. This data was collected at the end of 2018, around the time Youtube’s Influencer dominated landscape began to decline. We will focus primarily on the channel’s total amount of views, subscribers, and average views per video. From the bar chart below, we can see that Social Blade has categorized these channels into the following user-defined channel topics. From the histogram below, we are able to get a good sense of the wide array of total video views across all channels.
Research Scenarios
First, we would like to identify the category that produces the most amount of total views per channel. Based on our anecdotal evidence, we hypothesize that the music category will possess the most amount of views.
Second, we would like to investigate whether there is a relationship between a channel’s amount of subscribers, and the total number of views, compared to the amount of subscribers, and views per video.
In the first scatter plot above, we can see that there is a weak yet positive linear relationship between the amount of subscribers one has and subsequently the amount of total views their account receives. There appears to be a significant amount of outliers above 10B views. This may be due to the random virality Youtube tends to promote. When compared to the second scatterplot illustrating the weak, little to no positive relationship between the amount of views per video one may receive and the amount of subscribers one may amass, we can conclude that more subscribers may lead to lead to more total views but not individual views per video.
Lastly, we would like to explore the relationship between an accounts age (in weeks) and the total amount of subscribers an account has. Based on our anecdotal evidence, we hypothesize that older YouTube accounts have a lower amount of subscribers.
Discussion
Our analysis focused on understanding how these accounts achieved their total views and views per video by looking at the account’s category, subscribers, and age. We can confidently assume that each of the analyses concluded with weak relationships, pointing at many lurking variables. Due to the unpredictable nature of Youtube and the internet as a whole, these findings are not unexpected. In the future, the addition of subcategories broader than the general “entertainment” category may yield more specific and applicable results. This can be echoed throughout the rest of the categories, as we were left asking, ‘what music genres?' and ‘which sports?’. The inclusion of tags and content rights may further the discussions we intended to have about this data. With these additional metrics, our analysis may help a new Youtuber understand where they could fall within the existing and every changing landscape and expectations of the video sharing mega platform that is YouTube. Thank you.
