Introduction:
As individuals (at least in the United States), we tend to take large video-sharing platforms, like YouTube, for granted. YouTube is officially one of the most visited websites in the world (dataset description). Any person with a Google account (which most students and working professionals have or have access to) is capable of not only viewing every public video and channel on the website but also making their own channel and posting videos. These channels can be focused in any category, with the main ones being: Comedy, Education, Entertainment, Film and Animation, Gaming, Lifestyle, Music, News & Politics, and Sports. However, though YouTube/Google is an America-based company with international access, different countries have different speech laws and censorship rules. With the data given for this project prompt, students were given a chance to gain some insight into the channel category breakdown and popularity of different channels in many different countries. This research should help answer some questions about the presence and influence of YouTube in different continents and countries.
Dataset:
The dataset used here is a collection of YouTube channels, organized by country and continent, with their basic information (including topic) and viewing statistics/popularity, through 2018. This data comes from Social Blade, a website designed and dedicated to helping users keep track of their status and viewing data, since many users can monetize their channels and make a little money through advertisements and promotions.
The variables defined in the dataset include name of channel, category (user-defined), country, accountAge (in weeks, performed Dec 31, 2018), videoUploads (for the specific channel), subscribers, views (across all videos), viewsPerVideo (average), and continent. The most important variables for this study are category, country, accountAge, subscribers, views, viewsPerVideo, and continent.
The categorical variables are category, country, and continent. The counts for each category are shown in Figure 1a below, with Entertainment being the most common category with 517 channels while Sports is the least common with 23. Since the counts for individual countries are very low (Italy only has 8 channels listed total, 11 for Entertainment and 1 for sports) (Figure 1b), this study and report will focus on the continent scale for more accurate and diverse results.
The quantitative variables are subscribers, views, views per video, and accountAge. The figure below (figure 2) shows that though there are outliers (channels with high average views), most channels stay around a certain level of average views. However, with the regression lines for the different categories, there are some (barely noticeable) slight inclines, representing a gradual increase in average views as a channel’s subscriber count goes up.
Our first question relates to the distribution of the categories within each country and continent. In Figure 3, pie charts representing the distribution of channel types (category) by continent can be seen, with Entertainment as the most common category in every continent by at least 40%. There is a noticeable pattern in the top categories, where every continent has Gaming or Music as their second-highest, showing a global priority for these three categories.
By country, this data does not stay consistent, with outliers like Romania having 1 Entertainment channel and 6 Music channels. However, due to the sample being limited to channels that have been submitted to the Social Blade website, the data has been skewed slightly, since so many existing channels were not counted or analyzed and the continent distributions are most likely closer to correct.
This evidence leads me to the conclusion that, fairly consistently, Entertainment (including Music and Gaming) is the primary purpose of YouTube across the continents, in terms of existing channels.
Research Scenario 2: Category Popularity by Continent
Following the conclusion of the last research scenario, the Entertainment category (and related ones) are the most commonly found categories for channels. This section will discover if this numerical advantage is consistent in terms of channel and category popularity.
Looking first at the Americas, the most popular category in terms of viewsPerVideo is Music (Figure 4), while the most popular category in terms of subscribers is Comedy. This is already different from the data found in the last research scenario.
To accurately gauge channel popularity, viewsPerVideo is a better choice over views or subscribers really, since a channel could have one very popular video but gain no interactions on their other posts or they could have a high number of subscribers but have no viewer interaction on their videos. Figure 6 shows the distribution of viewsPerVideo by continent, with no clear top continents in video performance. However, Figure 7 shows the severe disproportion between the categories in each continent. Africa only has 3 of the continents listed and Music channels very dramatically take the lead in views per video.
The data discussed above has shown increased presence and user-interaction with/of certain channel categories; however, some of this data is out-dated and may be skewed by old, inactive channels. To gauge a continent’s active presence on YouTube, I have looked into the popularity of new channels (created within 52 weeks of December 31, 2018). Imposing this requirement severely reduced the amount of data I had to work with, to the extent that there were only 3 continents involved: America, Asia, and Europe. America has 12 new channels, while Asia and Europe have 2 each. Ignoring the bias caused by the limited dataset, America appears to be ‘growing’ the most, with the most new channels.
Keeping the flaws with this data in mind, I developed a histogram of accountAge by continent (Figure 9). The Americas histogram is right-skewed and shows a peak around 135-186, though it becomes a U around 600. Asia is mildly right-skewed. Europe, Africa, and Oceania are all fairly uniform. These trends could potentially represent a learning curve for new channels (takes a couple of years to grow) or simply represent a boom in YouTube channel creation around 2015. Because of the limitations of this data, it is nearly impossible to know more.
Discussion:
Though severely limited by my dataset, I was able to make conclusions in all three of my research scenarios. In scenario 1, I concluded that Entertainment is YouTube’s primary purpose/usage across the continents. In scenario 2, I noticed specific categories that were consistently highest in certain continents, like Music in America or Comedy in Asia. Scenario 3 led to the discovery of a peak in YouTube channel creations around 2015, which have remained active. Though different from my initial focus on censorship and government differences creating noticeable changes between the continents, the discoveries I made set the stage for future research into YouTube continent-based demographics.
However, I have essentially zero faith in the validity of my results on a (YouTube) world-scale. Too many existing channels were missing from the sample to feel confident with these results. As for future work, ideally, this study would be done with data coming directly from YouTube (with all, or at least more, channels included). With more data, I could have gone further into my analysis of accountAge with channel popularity and success. This study, done with access to all of the data necessary, could provide important information for advertisers, creators, the general public, and maybe even YouTube itself.
