Introduction:
When Youtube was founded in 2005, it served to be a platform where people could freely and respectfully express their ideas. It later evolved to be more than that, allowing content creators to monetize their videos with ad revenue and sponsorships. The world is at a stage where digitalization is greater than ever, utilizing cloud-computing, virtual meetings, artificial intelligence, and more. As we live in a virtually-oriented reality due to the pandemic, Youtube has become more significant (as reported in SILive, April 26, 2020: https://www.silive.com/coronavirus/2020/04/youtube-viewership-skyrockets-amid-the-coronavirus-pandemic.html). While new channels try to understand the Youtube algorithm and grow as much as possible, we believed it was of interest to determine the characteristics of channels with high subscriptions. Findings may possibly assist new and upcoming content creators trying to grow their channels.
Data:
For this analysis, a sample of 1259 Youtube channels was collected by Social Blade, a website that offers data/analytics on every channel (information gathered about each channel is up to the end of 2018).
The main variable of the study is subscribers. It is a quantitative variable measuring the number of people subscribed to the channel. The mean number of subscribers was about 3,201,758 people, with a standard deviation of about 3,556,605.
Other variables of this study include views and category. Views is another quantitative variable measuring the total number of views across all videos for a certain channel. The mean number of views was about 1,346,843,186 people, with a standard deviation of about 2,036,809,999. The median was about 675,927,454 viewers. The variable category is a categorical variable that represents the user-defined channel topic; there were 9 categories (Entertainment, Music, Sports, Lifestyle, Education, News & Politics, Film & Animation, Gaming, Comedy). In this sample, the most popular category was Entertainment, being 517 (or 41%) of the 1259 channels. Sports was the least popular category, only being 23 (or 1.8%) of the 1259 channels.
Research Scenarios:
The first question of interest is: “What is the distribution of subscribers on Youtube?” We believe that most channels have subscribers of above 1 million.
Figure 2 demonstrates that many of the Youtube channels in this sample have between 1 and 1.5 million subscribers. It is possible that the primary target for many channels is 1 million subscribers since channels with more than 1.5 million subscribers decline. It may be worth asking current content creators what their goals for subscribers are.
The distribution of Figure 2 is unimodal, peaking with channels between 1 and 1.5 million subscribers. It is skewed-right, as illustrated with the lengthy right-tail. This sample has potential outliers with channels at 15, 19, and 23 million subscribers.
When taking a more in-depth examination of the data, the average number of subscribers is over 3.2 million people with a sizeable standard deviation of over 3.5 million people. This brings a great variation in the possible number of subscribers per channel. Furthermore, the median was about 1,949,612 subscribers, indicating that half the sample had subscribers close to 2 million. Regarding the interquartile range, the 25th percentile sits at 1.08 million while the 75th percentile is at 3.88 million. From this, it can be deduced that only up to 25% of channels have about 1 million subscribers, allowing for the remaining 75% to have more than 1 million. These findings offer supporting evidence that our hypothesis is correct.
The second question of interest is: “Is an association evident between views and subscribers?”
We hypothesize that more views will equate to more subscribers. Higher views suggest that more people will be gaining exposure to the channel’s content. Since there is more exposure to that channel’s video, users may become interested and may in fact look at the other content the channel has to offer. More views of a certain video are also taken into account in the Youtube algorithm and affect the recommended videos for each user, which in turn can bring more subscribers for a creator.
When examining Figure 3, there is a relatively positive linear-direction between subscribers and views. The Pearson-correlation coefficient offers a value of 0.767, indicating that the data is more linear since it is closer to +1 than it is to 0. The data is skewed-right as the plot is a lot denser when closer to 0 views and scarcer when views increase. We can see a relationship that subscriber count increases when views rise.
From the simple linear regression model calculated with the data from the scatterplot, regression values give a clearer insight as to how views impact subscribers. For every 1000 increases in views, it is predicted that subscriber count goes up by 13, on average. Though this is not exact, it gives a better overall idea of how views affect subscribers. Given the findings, there is evidence to support our hypothesis that more views can bring more subscribers.
The last question of interest is: “Is there a correlation between subscribers and channel category?”
Despite Youtube’s purpose to be a platform for all forms of content, we hypothesize that entertainment channels will have the highest number of subscribers, on average, due to the other categories having other streaming platforms (e.g. Music has Spotify, Gaming has Twitch, Sports has ESPN, Comedy and News have TV channels). We also believe this is true since Entertainment is the most popular category in the sample.
Figure 4 above illustrates a side-by-side comparison with boxplots of each category. Lifestyle, Gaming, and Comedy seem to have slightly higher medians than the sample as a whole. All boxplots are also skewed right, indicating that averages are higher than the median for each category. Entertainment, Music, and Gaming have very high outliers, which bring their averages higher.
Though there are differences in the mean and median subscribers between the categories, the boxplots are quite similar. Distributions are similar in spread (IQR) and location, suggesting that there is no ‘true’ or significant difference between subscribers and category.
In the data of Table 3, above, it is shown that there is a moderate variation of average subscribers between each category, supporting claims made from the boxplots. Furthermore, the standard deviation is relatively very similar among all categories (asides from News & Politics and Education). The comparable figures continue to back the findings from the boxplot since there is little differentiation in the subscribers for each category. All categories also have large, equivalent variations, not allowing for a clear relationship between category and subscribers. In summation, the findings do not suffice to support our hypothesis of entertainment having more views. It also answers our question as there is not any direct relationship between subscribers and category.
Discussion:
To conclude, our study examined 1529 Youtube channels at the end of 2018 to gain a better understanding of subscribers. We examined the statistics of all subscriptions and for any possible relationships with category and views. We found that a majority of channels had at least, if not more than, 1 million subscribers, due to the unimodal, skewed-right character of subscriptions. We also discovered that there is a relationship between views and subscribers. When views are the explanatory variable and subscribers are the response variable, a positive, linear relationship was found between the two. However, there was no distinct relationship between subscribers and category. For future studies, it may be worth including a larger sample size for more statistically significant data, especially since Youtube has a very large database. Another two key variables for performing analysis on Youtube subscriptions would be the number of likes and comments (either per video or in total). Likes and comments are an important factor in measuring channel performance and would be worth examining. In all, our study may assist Youtube channels in understanding a few of the key metrics associated with Youtube subscribers and could help them grow their audience.
