Introduction:
YouTube has become a platform for creators to produce a variety of content for millions of viewers. Viewers can enjoy watching a wide range of activities, from mukbangs to gaming videos, and exploring different cultures and experiences. For many creators, YouTube is their career, so it is crucial to keep up with the trends and attract more subscribers, especially as trends seemingly change daily. Our goal is to better understand the patterns behind popular channels which could help YouTubers create content of greater interests to the general public.
Data:
We have information on a sample of 1259 YouTube channels up until the end of 2018, collected by Social Blade.
The primary variables of interest are the number of views per video and subscribers because they are quantitative variables that act as standard measurements for comparison among different channels. The mean value of subscribers is 3201757, and the standard deviation of subscribers is 3556605. The mean value of views per video is 2960682 with a standard deviation of 8332162.
A categorical variable for our research questions is the category of channels. The most popular category is entertainment, with a count of 517, making up 41.1% of the channels. The least popular category is sports, with a count of 23, making up 1.8% of the channels. We also examine a quantitative variable of the total number of video uploads. The mean value of total video uploads is 4460, and the standard deviation is 13608.
The first question is to characterize the distribution of the number of subscribers. We hypothesize that most channels have approximately 500000 subscribers after considering the difficulties of attracting and retaining subscribers due to the high level of competition on YouTube.
The distribution of Subscribers (figure 1) appears to be unimodal with the primary mode around 1 million to 1.499 million subscribers; it is not symmetric because it is strongly right skewed, with a long right tail. There are a few potential high outliers at around 21 million, 23 million, and 27 million subscribers.
The next research question is to investigate whether the number of views per video is related to the category of the channel and to characterize the possible relationship.
We hypothesize that the category of entertainment will have the highest number of views per video because we may assume that one of the main audiences of YouTube is generally teenagers/young adults.
Table 1 below is the summary statistics of the number of views per video by the category of the channel.
Table 1 indicates that there is a wide range of variation of the views per video by category: News & Politics have the lowest mean of around 120846 views per video, and Music has the highest mean with around 6417002 views per video. Furthermore, the standard deviation for Music is 18526444 views which implies that data for Music is highly varied.
Using side by side boxplots in figure 2, we can determine if there is a relationship between views per video and category of channel.
While the medians of Comedy, Lifestyle, and Education are similar, the high outliers and mean of Music prove to be inconsistent with the general pattern. While the boxplots sufficiently differ, the variation is sufficiently large. Therefore, we cannot determine a clear relationship between the category of channel and number of views per video, and our initial hypothesis does not align with the data.
The final research question is to investigate whether the number of subscribers is related to the total number of video uploads of the channel and to characterize the possible relationship.
Based on anecdotal evidence, viewers are more likely to subscribe if the channel releases more content. They may prefer to have more available videos to watch because that allows them to easily and quickly familiarize themselves with the type of content or style of the channel without waiting. Therefore, we hypothesize that a higher total number of video uploads may cause a higher number of subscribers.
Figure 3 displays the graphical relationship between the number of video uploads and subscribers with a scatter plot and linear regression model.
Discussion:
The analysis focused on examining common characteristics among popular YouTube channels. By considering the amount of subscribers and views per video, we were able to compare different categories and numbers of total video uploads for the channels in the sample. Our first research question was answered by discovering that many channels have more than 500000 subscribers. We could not determine a specific category of channel that proved to be more popular as there were high notable outliers and wide variation. Finally, we were unable to find a clear relationship between the total number of video uploads and subscribers as there was not a strong linear correlation. Not being able to track the activity of the subscribers is a limitation of our analysis because some subscribers may have gradually lost interest in the channel but did not unsubscribe. Additionally, the scope of our sample is limited because of the increase of YouTube channels since 2018. For future research, we would like to investigate the impact of the Coronavirus on the general trends of YouTube since 2020 because both viewers’ and creators’ lifestyles most likely were significantly altered by it. Conclusively, our analysis may have helped YouTubers understand how to release content that could attract more subscribers and views.
