Introduction:
Heart disease is the leading cause of death in the United States. According to the CDC, “one person dies every 36 seconds because of cardiovascular disease” (https://www.cdc.gov/heartdisease/facts.htm). I believe as we have seen a rise in fast food consumption and a culture of poor eating and exercise there has been a rise in cardiovascular disease related deaths. Heart disease can certainly be prevented; however, the measures necessary to protect the public from deaths of this type are often embraced too late for their to be a substantial change in the fate of the victim.
My goal for this report is to educate patients and non patients some realistic consistencies of people with heart disease, both men and women. This report will be an excellent resource for patients or people living a lifestyle that could lead to heart disease to receive an accurate picture of what the experience may look like. My overall research question is: “How does Heart Disease effect the genders differently?”
Data:
This data comes from 788 subscribers between the years of 1998-1999. Heart disease is a very popular claim in the insurance industry. This health data tracks the health insurance claims by people with heart disease and begins to explore the effect of heart disease on insurance companies.
The most important distinguisher I am working with in this report are males and females. The data set is unclear the manor in which the subscribers were gathered; however, the individual statistics about each male and female patient are how I evaluate this data, not as a total sum of male vs female subscribers. The three variables most important to the report are “interventions", “drugs”, and “duration.”
The “interventions” variable is the total number of when doctors had to “intervene” including procedures.
The “drugs” variable is the amount of prescription drugs each patient received. A “0” represents zero prescribed drugs, a “1” represents one prescribed drug, and a “2” represents two or more prescribed drugs.
Finally, the “duration” variable represents in days the total treatment time of the patient.
The data above gives an in depth picture of variable two of the study which looks at the number of interventions between men and women with heart disease. Though men seem underrepresented by the sample in this study, looking at the numbers above will put men and women on an equal playing field since the values are being calculated as a percentage of male patients only and the female statistics being calculated as a percentage of female patients only; the values do not have to do with the total sum of subscribers. Males had a higher mean interventions at 5.04 with women having on average 4.607. Similarly the 3rd quartile range for men was a full intervention/procedure higher at 7 while collectively women in this percentile had only 6. The maximum interventions seen by a female patient was a full 13 interventions higher than the male patient with the most interventions. There are many more women in this study but 13 interventions more of a maximum with a one point lower 3rd quartile range compared to men is a substantial value.
Displayed above is a table of statistics regarding the length in days of the duration of treatment for subscribers with heart disease. Men had a slightly higher average duration of treatment at 169 days compared to women who whose treatment on average was 162 days. Men had a substantially longer duration within the 1st quartile of 58 days compared to women whose duration was usually only around 40 days. The third quartile for men and women was roughly the same at 284 and 281 days, respectively.
Research Scenarios:
My first research question is whether there is a gender preference for drug prescription for patients with heart disease.
I hypothesize that there will not be a consistent pattern of drug prescription for one gender over the other and believe that any small changes between genders can be explained by unidentified lurking variables on a case by case basis.
Since I am evaluating the prescription of drugs I am going to focus most in my analysis on categories one and two as they signify the actual purchasing of drugs and I will use respective percentages of males and females that received zero subscriptions as the “base value” if you will to compare the remaining data.
Of the full count of patients who received zero prescriptions, women made up 78% and men made up 22%. Using these numbers, we can see that as prescriptions were prescribed, there was a drastic uptick in men seeing the prescription of one drug compared to women. For patients who received one prescription drug, men made up 29 percent and women made up 71 percent. This is a 7 percentage point swing positively for men and negatively for women compared to the base numbers that represent the genders difference in receiving no prescription. The category of prescriptions labelled two saw little change in percentage value between the base percentages and the percentages of males and females that received more than one prescription.
This data seems to point to an idea that men are more likely to be prescribed one drug than women if diagnosed with heart disease. The evidence is there that men receive one prescribed drug at a much higher percentage than men are to receive no drugs at all compared to women. However, due to a lack of experimental data and the existence of many lurking variables that would change the reason a doctor would prescribe a singular drug to a man, there is an association but no causation that men have a higher likelihood to receive a prescription of one drug after being diagnosed with heart disease.
My second research question seeks to discover: is there a correlation between gender and the number of interventions experienced by a patient.
I hypothesize that men and women alike will have a similar number of interventions for heart disease despite their gender differences.
Looking at the graph there seems to be very little correlations between the number of interventions and gender. No matter the gender, across the whole length of the x axis evaluating the duration of the battle, males and females alike experience a similar amount of interventions in their battle with heart disease. There are a few noticeable female outliers around a duration of 100 days and 150 days but there are no noticeable features that separate males from females in their number of interventions whilst fighting heart disease.
Ultimately, my hypothesis seems to have held true as their were not significant differences between the number of interventions between genders of patients with heart disease.
My final research question asks whether gender has an effect on the duration of a patients battle with heart disease.
I hypothesize that women and men alike experience similar durations in their treatment of heart disease.
My hypothesis has been proven incorrect that the durations between genders would be similar as the data is clear that men who have a short duration in treatment with heart disease on average still have a much longer treatment period than women.
Discussion:
My first question of interest evaluated the effect of prescription drugs on different gender patients with heart disease. I found that though there are slight differences, especially in the prescription of one drug, both genders are more than less equal because those slight changes could easily be explained away by lurking variables exposed on a case by case basis. There was an association by no causation.
My second question of interest looked for a change in interventions between males and females with heart disease. I found there to be no correlation between the number of interventions and gender of heart disease patients. The data was evenly spread on the scatter plot and the regression slope for males was 0.0123 and the regression slope for females was 0.0099: a difference of 0.0024.
My final question sought to find a difference in the duration of treatment by gender for heart disease. Upon further analysis, there is ample evidence from this sample of patients that within the 1st quartile of patients treated, men on average spend much more time in treatment than women: over two weeks on average!
A noticeable limitation on my dataset is the strong prevalence of women in the study. In carrying out a gender comparison study, I would have preferred a 50/50 spread of men to women or a sample of genders that at least matched the proportions of each gender affected by heart disease each year: neither of which is present by a 77% women to 23% male ratio of subscribers. Additionally, the study does not give information as to how the subscribers were chosen. If it was voluntary, my results could be skewed because of a prevalence of one version of treatment over the other, one severity of cases over the other, etc. Since the methodology of the sample is not specified, there are questions as to how fair the subscribers were chosen (from the standpoint of conducting a study).
I would like to have had access to the total prescriptions of medications for men and women to see beyond an ambiguous “two or more” value I was given above. Additionally, there are many more variables out there to study in the world of heart disease that could yield a noticeable difference between genders. Analysists can add to my work by building off of the roots I have reported here and finding more areas where their are gender differences in the treatment of heart disease.
