Introduction
Nowadays, there are many people who want to start their own youtube channel. A youtube channel is a platform where a user uploads his or her videos for others to view. If a user’s occupation is to upload videos on youtube, he or she is called a “youtuber” . A youtuber whether it is for the popularity or money desires more views. This study finds a relation between other aspects from a youtube channel and views that may possibly effect the views.
Data
Views(millions) is the main quantitative variables that shows how many views a channel gets in millions. The views variable is transformed by dividing 1million, so that we can observe relatively small and comparable numbers. The distribution of views(millions) is right skewed and unimodal with possible outliers from figure 1. From table 1, the mean, median, and standard deviation are 1346.843, 675.927, and 2036.810 respectively. This confirms that the mean is greater than the median: the distribution is skewed right.
Research questions include subscribers, category, and accountage variable. Subscribers is a quantitative variable that indicates how many subscribers a channel has. Observed in Table 2, the median and interquartile range for subscribers are 1.9 million subscribers and 2.794 million. Category is a qualitative variables that indicates which category the youtube channel falls into. Out of the 9 categories, entertainment has the largest proportion of channels with (41.1%). Sports has the least amount of channels with 1.83%. AccountAge is a quantitative variable that shows the age of the account in weeks. lnofaccountage is a quantitative variable that applied the natural log of account. Shown in Figure 3, the distribution of accountAge is unimodal and skewed the right. From Figure 4, lnofaccountage displays a distribution to be unimodal and skewed to the left. In Table 3, the mean, median, and standard deviation for accountAge and lnofaccountage are 305.056,266,173.080; 5.540,5.583, and 0.633.
This study inquiries an association between subscribers and views in millions. From this question, the study hypothesizes that there is a strong linear correlation between subscribers and views(millions).
From Table 4, the correlation coefficient shows to be 0.767. We find there is a relatively strong positive correlation between views(millions) and subscribers. This only indicates the strength and whether the correlation is positive or negative not whether there is a linear regression between the two variables.
Figure 5 is a scatter plot with views(millions) as explanatory variable and subscribers as response variables. There is also shown a linear fit for the scatterplot. We don’t observe possible outliers in the figure. Many data points are clustered from 0-5k views(millions) and 0-10M subscribers. There is shown to be a positive linear correlation between the two variables.
According to the correlation coefficient and the scatterplot, we are able to confirm that the there is a relatively strong linear correlation between views and subscribers. Hence, the first hypothesis is confirmed.
The second question from the study is whether views would depend on category. There are different types of videos a youtuber would create. Based on the type of videos, the youtube channel produce the same category of videos. Users of youtube would have a preference over what type of videos they would want to watch. We hypothesize there are certain categories that relatively earn more views than others.
From Figure 6, the box plots for views(millions) grouped by category shows that the Music, Gaming, Film and Animation, and Entertainment have a relatively large Interquartile Range with 1425.388, 1324.913, 1278.034, 1091.694. This indicates that 50% from the channels have views within the interquartile range. Music, Entertainment, and Comedy have the three largest median with 843.185, 741.263, and 712.180. This indicates that variables 50% is lower than the median and 50% is higher the median. However, taking range into consideration, we observe that Entertainment has the largest range (24517.504). This implies that the mean for Entertainment is not as big as the median because there is a wide variation among views. It is also observed that the amount of outlying variables the Entertainment category has.
The third question is whether the age of the account would effect the amount of views a channel would get. People tend to have an account as a youtuber or a general youtube user. Based on the same account, they decide to become a professional youtuber. Because they had an account created in the past and uploading videos in recent days, we hypothesize there is a weak positive correlation between views and accountAge. Furthermore, to characterize possible aspects from the correlation, this study utilizes the lnofaccountage variable.
From Table 5, we can confirm that the correlation coefficient is 0.341. This indicates there is a relatively weak positive correlation between accountAge and views(millions). To further characterize the correlation, Figure 8 is a scatterplot with accountAge as the response variable and views(millions) as the explanatory variable. Most of the variables are between 0- 5K (views in millions). In the same figure, there are outliers on the bottom right corner. Observing the smoother fit line, we notice the line is similar to an exponential line instead of a linear line. Hence, the study changes the accountAge variable to the natural log of accountAge (lnofaccountage) and creates another scatterplot.
According to Table 6, the correlation coefficient for views(millions) and lnofaccount is 0.325. It still indicates a relatively weak positive correlation between the two variables. The variables are mostly between 0- 5K (views in millions). The difference from Figure 8 is that the responses for the variables are more clustered towards 6. Also, there are no plausible outliers in the figure. In Figure 9, we can observe the smoothed fit is more of an exponential line instead a linear line. We are unable to establish the shape of the regression model from Figure 8 is an exponential model.
Summarizing the characterization between accountAge and views(millions), we find that there is a weak positive correlation. This directly confirms our hypothesis. We also confirm that the correlation is not linear but cannot further imply that the regression model is exponential.
Conclusion
In the study, we conclude that there is a positive correlation between views and subscribers, views and accountAge. The first correlation is a linear correlation, while the second is unknown. There should be further study to find a what kind of regression model the correlation has. One other conclusion we have is that Music and Entertainment have relatively more views compared to other categories. More studies should be conducted to find how the views grouped by categories are related through the countries the channel is originated.
One huge feature from the study is that it is an observational study not an experimental study. This implies that we cannot conclude that a causal relationship exists. The correlation between subscribers and views have a strong correlation but it is not clear to say one causes the other. There needs to be an experimental study conducted to find a causal relation between the two.
