Introduction:
Cardiovascular diseases being the number one killer in the US and responsible for 16% of the world's total deaths (according to the calculation by WHO: https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/the-top-10-causes-of-death) have wakened people’s awareness for preventing heart disease. Prevention of heart disease includes exercising on a regular basis and eating healthier diets, but this does not indicate whether certain groups of people are at higher risks for cardiovascular diseases. Through this project, we wish to find the factors related to higher heart disease risks and hopefully help the higher-risk-people better prevent heart disease.
Data:
Data used in this project came from records of 788 heart disease patients of both female and male with an age range from 24 to 70.
The number of emergency room visits(ERVisit) will be the primary focus. By comparing this quantitative data we can see how severe the patient’s condition is when other variables are kept the same. The range of ERVisit is from 0 to 20, for the convenience of further research, we can categorize the condition of the patients into mild, medium, and severe, with ERVisit ranging from 0 to 5 (mild), 5 to 10(medium), and over 10 (severe).
Our research questions will also include the following data: age of the patient, gender of the patient, number of other diseases that the patient had, the total number of interventions or procedures carried out, and the number of days of duration of treatment condition. The average(mean) age of heart disease patients is 58.718 (years), with 608 female and 180 male. The number of other diseases that the patient had is a quantitative variable that acts as an indicator of whether people with poor health are more likely to suffer from heart disease (This variable ranging from 0 to 60 can be categorized as healthy(0), relatively healthy(0-6) and poor health(over 6) for the convenience of comparing.) The total number of interventions or procedures carried out (ranging from 0 to 47, with a mean of 4.707) can also be used as an indicator of the severeness of the patient’s condition as well as the number of days of duration of treatment condition.
Our first question intends to find the relationship between the patient’s gender and the condition of their heart disease. By turning the quantitative variable ERVisits into a categorical one describing the severeness of the patient’s condition and naming the new variable “Severeness” we can then examine the relationship between heart disease and gender with a contingency table(Table 1). Calculating the numbers from Table 1 we find that 75.8% of female patients have a mild condition, 21.5% have a medium condition and 2.6% of them have a severe condition. Comparingly, 68.3% of male patients have a mild condition, 26.1% have a medium condition and 5.6% of them have a severe condition. From the above calculations, we can make the assumption that heart disease is more severe for male patients. To further examine this assumption, we can also compare the total number of interventions or procedures carried out for both genders in treating heart disease (Figure 2). Figure 2 shows that the median and q1 are the same for both genders while q3 and the upper fence are higher in male patients. However, from figure 2 we see that there are more outliers in female patients with a higher maximum value than the male patients, this could be the result of the disproportion in the gender of the sample.
Our next research question is to investigate whether heart disease is associated with the age of the patient. We would like to find out if a certain age is riskier to heart diseases and whether the risk increases with age. Figure 3 shows that there is a linear relationship between ERVisits and Age with a slope of 0.02427. The slope of this linear fit is very close to 0 so it is more likely that age has no relationship with the severeness of heart disease. A major default of this test is that the number of ER visits is related to how long the patient has had heart disease. The older the patient, the longer the time they may have had heart disease, and possibly the higher number of times they visited the emergency room. Therefore, to examine the relationship between age and heart disease we also need to know when the patient was diagnosed with heart disease for the first time. This point can also be confirmed with the relationship between the number of days of duration of treatment condition and age (Figure 4). The higher the age of the patients, the longer the patient has had heart, which can be presumed that the longer the time they spent in treatment. We can conduct from this test that time spent fighting against heart disease is an accumulative value rather than a direct relationship between age and the severeness of the condition.
To begin with, we first need to turn the quantitative variable Comorbidities (Number of other diseases that the subscriber had) into a categorical one describing the patient’s health condition. Naming the new variable Health Condition we can then examine whether there is a relationship between the patient’s overall healthiness and the severeness of their heart disease. From Figure 5, we can see that the median and q3 of all three groups are the same while q1 for the Healthy group is slightly lower. The upper fence, however, is surprising for the Healthy group has the highest among the three. There are a few more outliers for the Relatively healthy group and the Poor health group but overall, there is no clear trend between the health condition of the patient and the number of ERVisit. To examine the conclusion from Figure 5, we can plot the side-by-side box plot again between Health Condition and the number of Interventions (Figure 6). Surprisingly, there is an increasing trend between the number of Interventions and the Health Condition. Patients with poorer health tend to receive more treatments while healthier ones receive less. From figure 6, we may presume that there is a higher severeness of heart disease for patients with poorer health conditions.
Our project focuses on the risk of heart disease by analyzing the severeness of the condition among heart disease patients. Using the number of ERVisit as a measurement, and the number of Interventions as a supplement, we found that heart disease is more severe for male patients of all ages so the male population needs to pay more attention. We failed to see a clear trend between age and the severeness of heart disease but we do find that heart disease doesn’t worsen significantly with age. Lastly, we found that patients suffering from other diseases may be in worse shape dealing with heart disease. Our project can help people with or without heart disease understand the risk they are under and better prevent the effect of heart disease.
