Introduction:
Now more than ever during the crisis of the pandemic, there has been the most foot traffic on the Internet. Without being able to go outside as often as people used to, there has been a resorting to social media. One of the biggest social media platforms today is YouTube, a platform where creators upload videos that range from entertainment to politics. With more and more dependency on social media and the internet it would be interesting to better understand views of YouTube videos.
Dataset:
We have information up to 2018 on a sample of 1259 YouTube channels collected by the website Social Blade.
The main focus will be on the views, specifically the total number of views across all the videos of a channel.
As seen in the table above, the mean number of views is 1346843185.938, and the standard deviation of the views is 2036809998.695.
The research questions will include the category, number of subscribers, and the number of video uploads. Overall the relationship between the total number of views across all the videos of the channel and the said variables will be the core center of the research questions being asked.
With the last two research questions, they concern the quantitative variables of the number of total video uploads and the number of subscribers. It can be seen from table above, Table 2, that there is a mean of 4460.103 videos uploaded and a mean of 3201757.576 subscribers.
Research Scenarios
Our first research question asks if there is a relationship between the category of the channels and the number of total views that channel gets across all of their videos. Based on the initial evidence of the counts of the distinct variable, we hypothesize that there is a relationship between the category of the channels and the total number of views.
From the given table, we can see the respective averages of views garnered by each category. Just from the summaries of the table, there is a variation of averages across the categories: music and entertainment categories have the highest number of views while the sports and lifestyle categories have the lowest number of views. The relationship between each category by looking at a boxplot, as shown in the figure below.
The second research question pertains to the relationship between the number of subscribers a channel has and the total number of views a channel has. Based on the initial evidence of the mean of the number of subscribers, there is not much to gather intel from; so we can make a hypothesis that there is not a relationship between the number of subscribers a channel has and the total number of views a channel has.
The third and final research question asks if there is a relationship between the number of views uploaded and the number of total views a channel has accumulated. From the initial evidence of the average number of videos uploaded, there is not much to expect due to the lack of information, and this leads to the hypothesis that there is no relationship between the two variables, total number of videos uploaded and the total number of views a channel accumulates. However, the figure below, Figure 4, gives more insight.
Discussion:
Overall, the total number of views a channel can accumulate has other factors that can impact this number. The categories, such as entertainment and music, had a positive correlation with views, and the number of subscribers a channel has also had a positive correlation. On the other hand, there happened to be no relationship between views and the amount of videos uploaded. Some limitations my analysis had was that there could have been confounding variables that played a part in the results of the data, such as recent internet trends. Despite the possible issues with the data and personal analysis limitation, there is much to learn from the results gathered as the people who were able to gather this background information will be able to generate content of their videos to garner the attention of the audience. This project could also expand to the relationship between certain age groups and views or between countries and views for other data analysts to further understand the YouTube views.
