Introduction:
Youtube is a popular video sharing platform that is used all over the world. They have over 2 billion monthly active users with over one billion hours of watched content everyday (https://www.businessofapps.com/data/youtube-statistics/#1). Youtube views are influenced by a number of factors and this report dives deeper into some of the factors that facilitate more views on a video. This might help content creators learn where to focus their attention to get more views on their videos to make them more successful.
Dataset:
The dataset includes 1259 different channels on Youtube from the website Social Blade. They track analytics and specific statistics of influencers on social media. The main focus will be on views on Youtube and how different variables affect views. Views are a quantitative variable that measure the total amount of times all of the videos on a person’s channel has been watched. The mean amount of views was around 1.3 billion with the median amount of views being around 675 million. The different variables that will be examined to see their affect on views are subscribers, video uploads, and category. Subscribers is a quantitative variable that show the amount of people that have subscribed to a channel. Channels have a mean subscriber count of 3.2 million and a median subscriber count of 1.9 million. Video uploads is a quantitative variable the counts the total amount of videos that a channel has uploaded. The mean video uploads is 4460 videos and the median is 682. Category is a categorical variable and shows the genre of the videos that the channel makes. Examples of some of the categories include entertainment, sports, music, and etc.
Relationship between Subscribers and Views
For the first research scenario, it will examine the relationship between subscribers and views to see whether there is an association between them. It can be hypothesized that channels with more subscribers will have more total views because subscribing to a channel helps retain audiences to come back and watch more videos.
In Figure 1 below, it shows a scatterplot of views vs subscribers and a linear regression model of the data points. It seems like there is a positive correlation between more subscribers and more views with the linear model positive sloped. The data also looks very right skewed with most data points around or less than 8 million subscribers. There are also a few outliers near the 17 million subscriber range that have a significant amount of views that is a lot higher than the rest general data.
Views with Channel Categories
For the second scenario, how different categories of channels and their amount of views will be examined. This will help show if there is an association between certain categories and views. Since the entertainment industry is very big and popular among a variety of populations, it can be assumed that channels that are in the entertainment category has the most views out of the other categories. Categories like gaming may be seen as having a lower amount of views because it does not appeal to the general audience and only to certain groups of people.
The mean and standard deviation of views grouped by category is shown in Table 4 above, it is shown in descending order. The table shows similar results from the box plots that we observed above with music, entertainment, and etc being the top categories. However we do see that the Film category has the third largest mean, but this is due to the mean being very sensitive to outliers. There seems to be a very large standard deviation with it being around 2 billion for the top categories. This table also shows that the category, sports should be some what avoided as they have significantly lower amount of mean views than the other categories. This is also seen in the boxplots above. In general, the top categories should be what content creators should focus on as they generate more views than the rest of the categories.
Video Uploads and Views Relationship
The last scenario that will be examined is to see if there is an association between video uploads and views. It can be reasonably hypothesized that channels with more video uploads have more views because it gives viewers more opportunities to watch different videos on the channel to increase the amount of views. Channels with less videos may have less views because the viewer can only watch so much of the same videos.
In Figure 5 shown above, the scatterplot of views vs video uploads is very right skewed with most data points being less than 5,000 video uploads. The linear regression model looks very flat showing that there may be no association between video uploads and views. The data points vary a lot with channels with the same or similar amounts of videos uploaded, but their views are drastically different. There are some outliers with channels having a lot of videos uploaded and a lot of views accordingly, but the amount of views are roughly comparable to the amount of views of a channel with a lot less videos uploaded. This outcome is reasonable because it would be very difficult for a lot of channels to have over 5000 videos uploaded as that takes a lot of time. There does not seem to be an association between videos uploaded and views.
In Table 6, the correlation coefficient between video uploads and views is shown. The value of the correlation coefficient is only 0.153 which shows that there is a very poor relationship between video uploads and views. This summarizes the scatter plot in Figure 5 and shows the strength of the linear regression model. This correlation coefficient value is expected because of the relatively horizontal liner model in Figure 5.
Discussion:
This report has shown that certain variables have different effects on the amount of views that a channel has. The data used consisted of 1259 channels on Youtube. The variables mainly focused on were subscribers, channel category, and video uploads to see if there were any sort of association between them and views. The strongest association that we saw was between subscribers and views with a correlation coefficient of over 0.7 meaning that more subscribers are associated with more views. Categories of channels and how many views were generated were a bit difficult to examine as they looked generally the same, but some genres like music and entertainment were seen as top categories with generally more views than categories like sports and life style. There were a lot of outliers in categories especially in the entertainment genre that was a lot higher than the upper fence of the box plots. This can be expected with viral videos that garner a lot of attention. The last scenario examined was between video uploads and views to see if there was relationship between them. After using a linear regression model and scatterplot of the data, it shows that there is a very poor correlation between video uploads and views. The correlation coefficient was around 0.15 which is very close to 0 so there is no meaningful relationship. This can be used to see that viewers may prefer higher quality videos over quantity of videos. A somewhat ideal channel that focused on these three variables affecting views would try to gain a larger subscriber base, be a music or entertainment oriented channel, and make high quality videos rather than a lot of videos.
There are some limitations because this report only focused on three variables affecting views, but there may be many more variables that can influence views. This report is not inclusive of all potential variables that a content creator has to focus on. To expand on what was found, someone could look into what ages watched Youtube the most to hone in on the content that a creator should focus on to gain more views. Also the general point of trying to gain more views is to make more money, but dollar per view rate may be different for different videos and categories.
