Introduction:
As the living standard of people increases, consumption of luxury goods such as diamonds increases. The global demand for diamonds continues to reach new highs (as reported for instance in The Diamond Loupe, May 17, 2018: https://www.thediamondloupe.com/market-analysis/2018-05-17/us-leads-global-demand-diamond-jewelry-record-high). The price of diamonds, accordingly, also rises rapidly throughout time (as shown, for instance, by Statista in November 2016: https://www.statista.com/statistics/279053/worldwide-sales-of-polished-diamonds/). While it is possible for people to assume that a higher price means bigger and better diamonds, our goal is to find out whether the differences in features of diamonds (in this investigation, we specifically study weight and cut) are reflected in price. The result of this study can thus help consumers to gain a better understanding of the pricing of diamonds and make better decisions when buying diamonds.
The primary focus of this study is on the variable price. It is a quantitative variable that tells us how much we need to pay (in dollars) for the final diamond product. The mean price is about $3859.48, while standard deviation of price is about $3906.35. The minimum diamond price in this sample is $339.00 while the maximum price is $18779.00, showing a range of $18440.00.
Carat and Cut are the other two variables that are involved in the research questions which will be presented in later sections. Carat is a quantitative variable that represents the weight of the diamond (1 carat is approximately 200mg). The mean weight is 0.793 carats and standard deviation is 0.469 carats. As shown on the histogram below (Figure 1), the weight of diamonds in the sample peaks at 0.28-0.32 carats, and the data is strongly skewed to the right.
Cut is a categorical variable showing the graded quality of the workmanship of the diamonds. The qualities of diamonds fall into five categories: fair, good, very good, premium and ideal. As the frequency table below (Table 1) shows, in the sample, number of diamonds of ideal cut is greatest (1930 diamonds have ideal cut, comprising 38.6% of the 5000 diamonds). Diamonds with fair cut have the smallest number (occupying about 3.0% of the 5000 diamonds).
The first question we are going to address is the distribution of price. Based on our common sense, we predict that most diamonds have high prices (above $3000) as they are a kind of luxury goods.
As the histogram of price below (Figure 2) shows, a large number of diamonds have price between $500-999. (We could hypothesize that this pricing of diamonds is to make them more affordable to greater population, thus increasing the sales of diamonds. In future studies, surveys and investigations can be carried out to verify this hypothesis.)
The distribution of price (Figure 2) shows that there is a primary mode, peaking at the range of $500-999. The number reaches 1159, comprising about 23.3% of the 5000 diamonds in the sample. The distribution is strongly right-skewed, with price reaching the range of $18.5k-18.999k. The diamonds with price higher than 13k can be considered as outliers.
Although the mean price of diamonds is high, some of the quantitative findings above contradict our hypothesis that most of the diamonds have prices over $3000. Since the median value is $2405.5, it shows that half of the diamonds have prices lower than $2405.5, thus more than half of them have prices lower than $3000. Thus, it can be concluded that our first supposition is not accurate according to the data.
It is reasonable for people to believe that a diamond with a larger size values more than a smaller one while other conditions are equal. And this is probably true. But in order to determine whether this positive relationship is a linear one or not, more investigation should be involved. Here, we hypothesize that there is a linear relationship between price and carat, meaning the rise in price is proportional to the increase in weight of the diamond.
We include all 5000 diamonds in the sample, and use a scatter plot to build a linear regression model to show the relationship between carat and price. The model is shown below (Figure 3).
Table 2. Regression and Correlation of the Relationship Between Price and Carat
From Table 2, we can see that the correlation coefficient between these two variables is 0.992, which can act as an indicator that there is a sufficient linear relationship between price and weight. Thus our second assumption is correct. The slope is about 7767.68, meaning that for each additional carat of the diamond, the price will rise $7767.68 on average. The y-intercept is a negative value, but it does not mean that for a diamond of 0 carat the price is $-2230.75 in average in reality.
The last research question is to see if there is a relationship between cut and price. Since higher qualities of cutting probably need more time or skills, and the resulting outcome of the diamonds will be better than those with lower qualities, it is reasonable to assume that there is a positive relationship between quality of cuts and price, meaning diamonds of fair cut should have the lowest mean price and diamonds of ideal cut should have the highest mean price.
In order to investigate the actual relationship, we first compare the mean and standard deviation of the prices in each category of cutting. The data are shown below (in Table 3, which is created by hand).
In the table above (Table 3), we can see that there is no clear relationship between the mean prices and the level of cutting. Diamonds of premium cut have the greatest mean price at about $4583.57, followed by those of very good cut, having mean price at about $3874.55. Diamonds of fair cut have 3rd higher mean price while the quality of cutting should be the lowest, while diamonds of ideal cut, the highest level of quality, have the smallest mean price of about $3402.21.
From both the table (Table 3) and the figure (Figure 4), we notice that there are fluctuations in prices for diamonds of different cuts. However, there is not a general trend showing the relationship between the level of cut and the prices.
Discussions:
In conclusion, this investigation focuses on price of diamonds, aiming to find its distribution and its potential relationship with carat and cut of diamonds. We find that the distribution of price is strongly right-skewed, with a uni-mode at range of $500-999. There is a positive linear relationship between price and weight of diamonds, meaning diamonds of more carats leads to higher prices (as expected). However, there is no clear relationship between the level of cut and price of diamonds. There is a probability that this is due to the fact that we have not controlled the other variables well while there exist some variables that have a great influence on price. In the future, we will improve this limitation by controlling the other variables constant or only allowing small fluctuations. Future investigation will also involve color and clarity because we want to see whether these two categorical variables have positive relationships with prices as we would expect or would they end up like the variable cut. In all, our analysis can help consumers of diamonds to have more knowledge about what the pricing of diamonds reflects and help them make better choices instead of merely holding the belief that the higher the price, the better.
