Introduction:
The social media platform, YouTube, has grown significantly since it’s creation in 2005. YouTube has become a video-sharing platform that billions turn to for all sorts of entertainment with videos that can garner billions of views and influencers with millions of subscribers. People often wonder how the algorithm works. Videos can go randomly viral years after they are posted. A creator with little to no views can garner thousands after posting just one video that makes its way to the main page. Our goal is to try to understand and unpack how the algorithm works what trends we see in videos, their views, and the accounts they are posted on. This work can be used by YouTube creators and users to improve their experience on the platform and understand the workings of it.
The primary focus will be on the variable viewsPerVideo, a quantitative variable that measures how many views each video garnered on average for the account in question. Views is not measured by every person who watched it, but by how many times that video was viewed; this includes repeat views from one person. The mean view per video count was around 2960682.062 views per video.
Our research questions are such: views per video dependent on the category of the account, views per video dependent on subscriber count, views per video dependent on country of origin. Our research questions will have us looking at the variables category, subscribers, and country. Category is a categorical variable that documents the kind of content different accounts are creating. The most popular category is Entertainment (517 out of 1259 accounts fall under the Entertainment category) and the least popular category is Sports (23 out of 1259 accounts fall under the Sports category). Country is also a categorical variable, it documents the country from which the account is based and the videos are uploaded. The most uploads are from the United States (595 out of 1259 accounts are from the United States) the least amount of uploads are from Thailand and Romania (both individually make up 9 out of 1259 accounts). Subscribers is a quantitative variable indicating how many people are subscribed to each account. The subscriber count ranges from 107,329 to 27,765,423 subscribers. The mean subscriber count is 3201757.576 subscribers.
Research Scenarios:
Our first question will be to understand the count of views based on the category of the account. The categories correspond to the kind of content that account creates. Youtube is a platform that thrives on diverse content. It is reasonable to assume that videos with different kinds of content will get different kinds of views. This question can help creators and YouTuber viewers understand what kind of content will gain more views than others.
We start with a boxplot (Figure 1), we observe that the most viewed videos on average are the music videos. In Figure 1, we can see that the music category has the most outliers and is heavily positively skewed. This means that the mean is greater than the median. The data tells us that the median is around 1.218 million views per video. That means the mean is higher than that. The Entertainment category’s median is 943.066 thousand. Since its box plot is also heavily positively skewed, the mean is going to be larger than that. Since the views per video range from around 4,500 (the lowest minimum is around 4,500 views. Derived from Figure 1) is to 211 million, it is safe to say the average views per video for Music and Entertainment are fairly close. Just taking that into consideration, since the average views for both categories are so close together, both are a safe bet for content creators trying to create videos that gain high views. However, the further we look at the data, we can affirm Music is the more successful category. The minimum is 21.454 thousand, Q1 is around 406.738 thousand, Q3 is around 4.915 million, and the maximum is around 211.313 million. Additionally, the music category has significantly more outliers than the entertainment category. The outliers lie very high the number of views, ranging from around 11 million to 211 million. Entertainment’s minimum is around 12.605 thousand, Q1 is around 321.602 thousand, Q3 is around 2.431 million, and the maximum is around 30.791 million views. Entertainment’s outliers only range from around 5 million to 31 million. Therefore, we can safely say that music videos are significantly more likely to do better than Entertainment in terms of garnering views.
Figure 2 only supports that. In the histogram (Figure 2), we can see that there are many Entertainment videos in the data set and they do fairly well. The Entertainment histogram is heavily rightly skewed, most of the views lie in the 0 to 4 million views per video. However, the music videos’ get better views. Entertainment videos aren’t very likely to get more than 5 million views because of the heavy right skew peaking at around 1 million. The Music histogram is rightly skewed but not as heavily as Entertainment. It peaks around 1 million as well, but the right tail is much longer. This means the the music video’s viewsPerVideo have a large spread. Music videos are more likely to garner views from 0 to 25 million than Entertainment because of the Music historgram's extended tail to the right.
Figure 1 and Figure 2 show us that accounts that release music video content are most likely to gain high videos; Entertainment accounts are a close second in likelihood of getting high videos. Content creators can use this conclusion to understand what videos to make if they hope to gain high views.
Our second question will be to understand the videos per video based on the number of subscribers of the channel. When a person subscribes to a channel, that channel’s videos will show up more on that person’s YouTube recommended page. If more people subscribe, more people will get recommended videos from that channel. However, we want to know whether more subscribers leads to more views per video for that channel and whether there is a correlation between the subscriber count and views per video. This can help creators understand how many views they can expect to garner based on their subscriber count and whether they can gain a high number of views despite their subscriber count.
Figure 3 is a scatter plot of viewsPerVideos vs. subscribers. We use this to understand how many viewsPerVideo an account can expect to gain based on their subscriber number. If we take a look at Figure 3, even though it is severally zoomed out, we can see the viewsPerVideo vs. subscribers isn’t linear. When we look at the zoomed in version of Figure 3, we can predict that the correlation coefficient is very low. If we take a look at Table 1, the correlation coefficient is 0.135. We can also see that people with 0 to 5 million subscribers tend to gain views per video ranging from 0 to 5 million views.
All this considered, it is safe to say that low subscribers are more likely to lead to low viewsPerVideo (based on the data); however, the lack of linearity in the data shows that more subscribers is not likely to lead to higher views. That lack of linearity and the extremely low correlation coefficient shows the number of subscribers has very little correlation to the views per video.
From this, content creators can understand that they can still garner many views if they have a lower number of subscribers. They can also understand the correlation between the number of subcribers and views per video is very low. That also means that higher subcriber counts do not cause high views.
Our third question will be to understand the views per videos based on the country the video is uploaded from. Different countries have different populations and different global reaches. It is safe to assume that countries with larger populations and countries with more global reach will gain higher views. This question will help us understand which country’s videos do better on the platform. This can help content creators understand which countries are the best to upload from if aiming to gain the highest views.
Looking at Figure 5, we can actually see that the medians for videos uploaded in India and in Great Britain are fairly similar to the median of the United States. The United States’s views per video’s median is around 1.411 million. The median number of views for India is around 1.379 million views. The median number of views for Great Britain is around 1.354 million. Since these three are all heavily positively skewed, the average is to be higher than the median. Since all three’s medians are so close, we can assume their means will be as well. We can also note that the United States’s boxplots have more outliers in the higher view counts.
It is safe to say that videos uploaded in the United States have a higher chance of doing well given the findings from Figures 4 and 5. But Figures 4 and 5 also show that videos posted in India and Great-Britain on average do as well as videos from the United States. While India has a significantly greater population than the United States and Great-Britain (according to a 2021 Worldometer consensus: https://www.worldometers.info/world-population/india-population/), the United States and Great-Britain have a greater global influence (United States more than Great-Britian) (as reported by U.S. News in a 2020 consensus: https://www.usnews.com/news/best-countries/influence-rankings). Italy has the most global influence according to the consensus, but it has a significantly lower population than the U.S., India, and Great-Britain; therefore, it’s lower average of views per video make sense (Median views per video for Italy is around 310,000. The right skewed box plot suggests a higher mean than the median). The data proves that countries with greater populations and countries with greater global influence garner more views per video.
Discussion:
When answering question 1, we saw that videos in the Music categories tend to the best in terms of gaining views, with Entertainment videos coming in at a close second. When we answered question 2, we saw that channels with subscribers ranging from 0 to 5 million subscribers tend to gain views per video around the number of subscribers they have. However, we noted a lack of linearity between the subscriber count of a channel and views per video. This shows that more subscribers does not necessarily lead to more views. This affirms that it is the content of the videos that are leading to the high views. With that in mind, we can safely affirm that Music and Entertainment videos are the best categories for someone to create content in if hoping to gain high views. When answering question 3, we did see a strong relationship between the countries that videos are uploaded from and the views those videos gather on average. Videos from the United States have more videos with high views. We also learned that videos posted in India and Great-Britain gain the similar amount of videos on average as videos from the United States.
Future analyses could also see the relationship between views per video and account age. It is plausible that the older the channel, the more views they gain per video since they have been around for a longer time and have gained a more loyal following and viewership.
We might ask for information on the age ranges of the viewers. It would be interesting to see whether channels that have predominantly minors as their viewing audience get more views than channels that have predominantly adults as their viewing audience. Since children have more free time in the day, therefore, having more time to watch more videos, it is plausible that channels with minors as their predominant viewing audience would have more views.
Overall, our analysis can help content creators and viewers alike understand what variables can contribute to videos gaining more views. Using this information, content creators can get a better grasp of what kind of content they want to create (if their goal is to gain the most views) or what number of views to expect based on their content, subscriber count, and country of origin. Viewers can get a better grasp of how the algorithm works and which videos tend to do better on the platform.
