Due to global warming, forest fires have become more and more common throughout the globe. Rising temperatures along with drier climates have caused deadly forest fires to rapidly spread and destroy acres of land in forests. Forest fires have also had a grave effect on humans as it has caused multiple deaths and thousands of buildings to be destroyed in recent years (https://www.iii.org/fact-statistic/facts-statistics-wildfires). Our goal in the current work is to better understand the causes and monthly patterns of these forest fires. This examination may be of help to protect areas that are most vulnerable to forest fires by examining trends in forest fire statistics.
We obtained information on a sample of 517 forest fires from January 2000 to December 2003, collected from Montesinho Natural Park.
Our main focus will be on the variables DC and FFMC. DC, or drought code, measures the moisture content of deep organic layers without taking into account humidity. FFMC, or Fine Fuel Moisture Code, measures the moisture content of surface litter. The mean FFMC and DC were 90.645 and 547.90 respectively. On the other hand, the median FFMC was 91.6 while the median DC was 664.2.
Our research questions will also include the temperatures and month. The variable month is a categorical variable indicating the month of the year in which the fire took place. August and September were the most frequent months for forest fires (making up 35.6% and 33.3% of all forest fires respectively) while November was the least frequent month (only making up .193% of forest fires). Temperature is a quantitative variable that measures the temperature in celsius of the climate when the forest fire occurred. The mean temperature was 18.889 degrees Celsius while the median temperature was 19.3 degrees celsius.
Distribution of Forest Fires and Temperatures during the Year
Our initial question will be to find the distribution of temperatures and forest fires during the year. We hypothesize that more forest fires will occur during drier and hotter months around summertime.
With the pie chart of the frequency of forest fires (figure 1, below), we observe that most forest fires occur during the months of August and September with 68.9% of forest fires occurring during those months. We matched this information with that of temperatures during the year and was able to build a relationship between temperature and forest fire occurrence. In the most common months for forest fires, temperatures were the highest with medians of 21.25 degrees Celsius in August and 19.65 degrees Celsius in September compared to the average median of 14.44 degrees Celsius over the whole year (seen in figure 2). It is also notable that fewer forest fires occurred in the lower temperature months of January, December, and November (2.32% of all forest fires).
Our second question will be to find if FFMC and DC have a positive relationship with forest fire occurrence. The histograms of FFMC and DC (Figures 3 and 4, above) show the distribution of FFMC and DC data throughout all forest fires in the Montesinho National Park. The median FFMC was 91.6 while the mean was 90.645 with a relatively small standard deviation of 5.52. The median DC was 664.2 while the mean was 547.94 with a large standard deviation of 248.066. Both the FFMC and DC histograms are left-skewed meaning that more fires are occurring with higher levels of DC and FFMC.
The interquartile range of FFMC goes from the 25th percentile of 90.2 to the 75th percentile of 92.9. On the other hand, the interquartile range of DC goes from the 25th percentile of 436.6 to the 75th percentile of 713.9. This signifies that 25% of all forest fires in the area have an FFMC lower than 90.2, and a DC lower than 436.6, showing that a majority of forest fires occur with both high levels of FFMC and DC.
MOurlast research scenario will examine the relationship between FFMC and DC with forest fires by month to see if high levels of FFMC and DC really do cause more forest fires. When examining the relationship between FFMC and DC grouped by months it is observed that the median FFMC during the months of August and September were both 92.1 (shown in figure 5 and 6, below). These are both above the median FFMC value for all forest fires recorded at 91.6. This is again observed with the median DC during the months of August and September where they recorded medians of 647.1 and 728.6. These values were, on average, above the median DC for all forest fires recorded at 664.2. The value of DC in August fell a bit short of the median due to the extremely high standard deviation and variation of DC in the data set. The box plot of both also shows a relatively parabolic relationship as FFMC and DC both peak around the months of August and September.
Distribution of FFMC by Month of Year
Our analysis focused on the causes of forest fires through examining trends of FFMC and DC from a sample of 517 forest fires in Montesinho National Park from January 2000 to December 2003 and examined prospective relationships between Drought Code, Fine Fuel Moisture Code, and temperature during each month of the year. In the end, we found that FFMC and DC have a very positive relationship and correlation with the frequency of forest fires. We also found that forest fires are most common during the months of August and September. These two months also had very high median and mean DC and FFMC values which explain their heightened frequency of forest fires. Future analyses of this subject could also include how many fires were caused by humans to show differences between human-caused fires and natural fires. This would be significant in understanding more about the causes of these forest fires as many fires recently in 2020 were started by humans (ie. 2020 California Fire).
This data and analysis can assist countries, companies, and people around the globe in preparing against forest fires by predicting trends through examining FFMC, DC, and temperature.
