Introduction
Health insurance premiums in the US are a necessary fact of life for those apart of the American Healthcare system. When estimating premium rates, insurance companies fully access the lifestyle and preexisting conditions of their subscribers. For subscribers suffering from ischemic heart disease, insurance premiums are raised to reflect costly procedures, medications, hospital stays, and additional assistance. In order for insurance companies and subscribers to better understand their insurance expenses, it is important to examine the characteristics of their medical history and the total costs of their claim.
Datasets
The data utilized in this study originates from the information of 788 subscribers from January 1998 to December 1999. The key variable of the study that will be consistent throughout the following research questions will be the total cost of claims by subscriber in dollars, further referred to as costs. This variable will be quantitative with the mean cost for all 788 being $2,799.96. The standard deviation of the costs is $6,690.26.
In the following research scenarios, the variable of subscribers' Comorbidities and the variable of Interventions will be also be investigated in order to gauge possible correlation with total costs. Comorbidities is a quantitative variable that measures how many additional diseased the subscriber suffered from. From the total data set, 464 out of 788 subscribers(around 59%) suffered from at least one additional disease. The Intervention variable measures the number of times the subscriber has undergone an medical intervention or procedure. The mean number of Interventions is 4.707 and the standard deviation is 5.595.
Prior to examining subscriber Comorbidities and Interventions, we must also analyze the total costs of insurance claims for each of the 788 subscribers. We hypothesize that the total cost will be more than $1000 based on the complexities of treating heart disease.
When looking at the total costs, more than half the number of total subscribers pay less than $1000. However, in Figure 1, the data is skewed right with high outliers around $9,000, $11,000, and $18,000. The interquartile Range of the data is $1,744.325.
Considering those with multiple diseases logically require more medical attention, it can be easy to assume that the total costs of claims will increase to cover a wider range of care. With this information, a hypothesis can be made that those with more comorbidities will be subject to a higher cost.
In Figure 2, the relationship between costs and commodities is mapped via a scatter plot. While it is true that the subscriber with the highest total cost had 7 comorbidities, the data does not show a positive linear progression between more comorbidities and higher costs. In fact, those with 25 or more comorbidities had a total cost ranging between $4964.70 and $2918.80. The data also has two high outliers with subscribers that have 45 and 60 comorbidities but pay $2,011.60 and $2,916.80 in costs. Again, the hypothesis is disproved.
Based on the number of procedures a subscriber has undergone, the cost can be inferred to increase to accommodate the price of medical assistance. A hypothesis can be formed that the total cost will increase with the number of intervention.
In Figure 3 (above), the scatter plot demonstrates a positive linear regression with high frequencies of interventions correlating with high prices. The majority of the later follows a linear fit with high random error. There are high outliers, such as a subscriber who had 47 interventions and paid $7,388.90.
When examining the simple linear regression model, Table 1(below) also demonstrates a positive slope of 869.0756. In this chart, the hypothesis is mostly true.
Discussion
The focus of this study centered around the data of 788 subscribers from January 1998 to December 1999. When examining the data as a whole, the relationship between costs, comorbidities, and intervention proved to deviate from the expected outcomes of the initial hypotheses. Increasing medical conditions and medical interventions proved to not be the main factors in high prices and the increase in interventions demonstrated a positive relationship with high random error. For further study, it would be helpful to list the comorbidities of each patient to see if there was a correlation between certain diseases and heart disease. It would also be useful to include the weight of patients as there is a proven correlation between weight and heart health. Ultimately, the data has prove that additional study is required to identify the factors that lead to higher claim costs.
