Introduction
With the increasing influence that the COVID-19 global pandemic has had on people across the planet, healthcare has come to the forefront of concerns. Healthcare, by nature, elicits conversation about money in many countries including the U.S. Of the many illnesses that have been discovered, ischemic heart disease, also more commonly known as coronary heart disease, is the leading cause of death worldwide (Staff). In addition, attempting to recover from this disease is often linked to long treatment periods and high costs. For these reasons, and the medical conditions related to the disease, ischemic heart disease has proven to pose a serious threat to countless individuals. Along these lines, I intend to analyze how various factors related to ischemic heart disease patients’ background can, directly and indirectly, affect their healthcare costs for their treatment. Discovering possible relationships between these two variables may help enable patients to better understand the treatment costs.
Data
The data used for this report comes from 788 subscribers of medical treatment for ischemic heart disease from January 1998 to December 1999.
The backbone of this analysis relies on the "cost” variable from the recorded dataset. This variable describes the total medical claim costs for each of the recorded subscribers for ischemic heart disease treatment. The mean cost for medical claims is observed to be $2799.96. From analyzing Figure 1, we can see that this variable’s mode lies in the 0 - $1832 grouping of values. There is also distinct right skew in the dataset. The significant influence of this skewness on the mean can be seen from difference between the mean of $2799.96 and median of $507.20.
One variable that is touched upon on by a research question is the “age.” This quantitative value given for each subscriber in the dataset represents their age in years. From Figure 2, we can observe the unimodal nature of the age distribution with the mode seemingly being 65 years old. Summary statistics tell us the average age in the dataset lies close to 59 years old with the standard deviation being approximately 6.7 years. In addition, there seems to be a left skew to the distribution, allowing us to interpret that the dataset is less concentrated with subscribers of younger ages.
Another variable that is relevant to the analysis conducted is “drugs.” The drugs variable tells us the number of drugs each subscriber was prescribed for the disease based on its category in the dataset. From Table 1, we can see that it was most common that the subscribers were not prescribed a drug, also known as group zero. This group had a count of 610 individuals and a relative frequency of 0.774 which constitutes the overwhelming majority of the dateset. Equal numbers of individuals were prescribed either one and two or more drugs, group one and two respectively, with their relative frequencies both being 0.113.
The last variable that is crucial to the research questions studied in this analysis is “comorbidities.” This variable’s value represents the number conditions, not including ischemic heart disease, that each subscriber had while receiving treatment. Comorbidity values varied from 0 to 60 with the mean being around 4 additional diseases and a relatively large standard deviation of approximately 6 diseases.
Treatment Claim Costs and Age:
Our first research question is to determine whether there is an association between the total treatment claim costs of subscribers and their age, and describe any such relationship.
Since age is often linked with the overall health of an individual, it would practical to expect a correlation between the two variables described. As a result of deteriorating conditions that may come purely from a high age, the individual may require increased medical attention, time, or resources for their treatment. Likewise, younger individuals likely have certain characteristics that enable them to more easily be treated for ischemic heart disease. Along these lines, it is reasonable to expect that we will see a positive association between age and the treatment claim costs of the individual.
From an initial glance of Figure 3, we are able to see the left skewness of the dataset and the older ages of the subscribers on average. However, with a standard deviation of 6.75 years and mean of 59 years, we are still left with a large range of ages. More specifically, from these summary statistics, we can determine that 95% of the subscribers’ ages in our dataset lay between 45.5 and 72.5 years old. This statistic will be used in later discussion.
Further interpreting Figure 3, we can analyze any possible association between the treatment claim costs and the ages of subscribers. Visually studying the data, we are able to see that the costs are fairly evenly spread out across the ages with some noticeable outliers across the plot. Using EDA to analyze this association relies on the correlation coefficient between these variables. Calculating the correlation coefficient, we get a value of -0.059. Contrary to our expectations, this fairly negligible correlation leads us to believe that the age of the subsciber does not have a correlation with the medical claim costs that they paid. One possible explanation could be that there is little difference in base health conditions for the subscribers in our dataset as a result 95% of their ages being between 45.5 and 72.5 years old. In addition, the lack of a strong correlation coefficient could have resulted from the association not being linear in nature.
Treatment Claim Costs and Drug Prescriptions:
Our next research question is to determine, and possibly describe, whether there is an association between the total treatment claim costs and the number of drugs prescribed.
As seen from the data section of this analysis, 77.4% of subscribers for ischemic heart disease treatment were not prescribed any drugs. As a result, it may be reasonable to assume that the rare prescription of these treatment drugs is characteristic of a small number of special cases of the disease that are more detrimental to the patients. Along these lines, we would expect to see, on average, higher costs for individuals that are prescribed one or two or more drugs for their treatment. In other words, we would anticipate a positive association between these two variables.
In studying Figure 4, it is crucial to recognize the number of drugs prescribed for each category are as follow: zero prescribed for group zero, one prescribed drug for group one, and two or more prescribed drugs for group two. Analyzing the plots for each of the drug prescription categories, the most striking difference can be seen from comparing their medians. While the median treatment claim cost for subscribers that were not prescribed drugs was $446.25, that of subscribers prescribed one drug and those prescribed two or more drugs were $1231 and $1132.2 respectively.
In addition, this difference can be observed in the variance of spreads of treatment claim costs for each drug prescription category. While the IQR of group zero lies between $153.8 and $1,395.8, that of the second group and third groups lay between $196 and $4221.53 and $201.65 and $4663.73 respectively. There is very little overlap between the IQRs of group zero and group one for the prescription drugs. We can also see the magnitude of this difference visually from Figure 4.
From this information we can say with reasonable confidence that the prescription of drugs for subscribers’ of the treatment for ischemic heart disease is associated with their medical claim costs. As we had expected, we can observe that, on average, subscribers who were prescribed drugs had higher treatment claim costs than those who were not prescribed drugs. However, it is also important to note that there doesn’t seem to be a recognizable difference between the treatment costs of subscribers who were prescribed one drug to those prescribed two or more drugs.
Treatment Claim Costs and Comorbidities:
Our last research question is to determine whether there is an association between the total treatment claim costs and the number of comorbidities of the subscribers, and analyze any such relationship.
As mentioned in the data section of this analysis, the amount of comorbidities that an individual has represents the number of diseases that they are affected by, not including ischemic heart disease. It is fairly common in the medical field that, for a patient with more than one illness, the treatment of one disease may be affected or changed with respect to the others of the individual. Along these lines, it would reasonable to expect a positive association between the number of comorbidities and the total claim cost for subscribers of ischemic heart disease treatment.
Using Figure 5 and relevant summary statistics, we are able to observe whether there is an association between the variables in question. From the scatterplot, we are able to visually recognize that the comorbidities values are heavily skewed to the right with the majority of values being close to the previously calculated mean of around 4 comorbidities. Though the relationship initially seems to be negative as a result of treatment claim cost outliers, the calculated correlation coefficient for this association is 0.146. This relatively low coefficient seems to suggest that there is little to no association between the number of comorbidities a subscriber has and the total treatment claim costs.
Discussion
Throughout this lab report, we have looked at how various characteristics of 788 ischemic heart disease patients can be associated with their total amount of claim costs. Overall, we observed that the average total treatment claim costs for subscribers was $2799.96 with a median value of $507.20 as a result of skewness in the dataset. Using EDA to examine our three research questions concerning cost, prescription drugs, comorbidities, and age, we were able to find evidence that both refuted and supported our expectations. While our EDA supported a possible association between the prescription of drugs and total treatment claim costs, other EDA refuted associations for both the age and comorbidities variables with respect to total treatment claim costs.
There were also several drawbacks to analysis conducted. First, it could be seen that several summary statistics were heavily influenced by huge outliers which was especially prominent for the cost variable. Also, since this data is outdated by more than twenty years, this data may not be accurate in describing some of these same associations in current day medicinal treatment for ischemic heart disease.
To build upon this research, it may be appropriate to record more recent data regarding characteristics of ischemic heart disease treatment subscribers. This would allow us to gain more accurate and representative results that could help us further understand any possible associations between patient characteristics and the total cost of claims. In addition, other facets of this overaching research question could be studied if researchers were able to collect more data regarding certain characteristics of the patients such as habits.
