Introduction
The NFL plays a huge role in American culture. When rival teams compete, the intensity of the game increases. Getting any more insight into how a team will perform provides a sense of security going into betting pools and fantasy leagues. This report looks at one side of football's greatest rivalry, examining the Green Bay Packers and how their performance changes when facing the Chicago Bears compared to any other team.
Dataset
This dataset involves various passing statistics of players in every game from 2009 to week 17 of the 2018 season. Ron Yurko created it as part of a scraping project in R. Note, though there is data for all players in the league, this report only focuses on Green Bay’s players, for a total of 125 observations.
This report focuses on the categorical variable rival from opponent (a categorical variable telling the opponent of the game). If the opponent was the Chicago Bears, Green Bay’s rival, rival is yes. If not, rival is no.
The research questions (discussed following this) also use pass attempts, completion percentage, and yards per drive. Pass attempts is a quantitative variable that states how many passes they attempted for each player in each game. Most players have 30 - 40 pass attempts per game, with a mean of 34.648 attempts and a standard deviation of 8.018. The histogram (figure 1 below) is unimodal and symmetrical. There is one notable outlier, as the data is grouped by player and game, a punter attempted one pass. The quantitative variable completion percentage is the proportion of pass attempts the intended recipient caught. Most players have a 60-75% completion rate per game with a mean of 0.668 and a standard deviation of 0.092. Again the histogram (figure 2 below) is unimodal and symmetrical with one outlier. The punter completed his pass for a 100% completion rate. Lastly, yards per drive is a quantitative variable used to examine the quality of the game. Most players have about 20 - 35 yards per drive in a game, with a mean of 29.562 and a standard deviation of 8.128. Again the histogram (figure 3 below) is unimodal with a slight skew right.
Pass Attempts
The first question to be explored is understanding the relationship between competing against a rival and pass attempts, if there is one at all. Personal beliefs lead to the hypothesis there will be an increase in pass attempts when playing against a rival team.
Table 1 (see below) was created to explore the mean and standard deviation grouped by rival to understand the differences of the centers and spread of the data.
As seen in the table, the means of the rival and non-rival games are very close, and though the standard deviations are different, the difference in means is well within one standard deviation for either. This leads to the belief that there is no relationship between facing a rival and pass attempts, but this can be explored further to confirm.
A lack of a relationship can be confirmed by a graphical analysis of comparative box plots in figure 4 below.
Overall, though there are some differences in the centers and spread, there is not enough evidence to say there is a relationship between pass attempts and rival.
Completion Percentage
The second question to be explored is understanding the association between playing a rival and completion percentage if present. Again, personal baises lead to the hypothesis there will be an increase in competition percentage when playing a rival team.
The methodology is the same as before. Table 2 (see below) was created to explore the mean and standard deviation grouped by rival to understand the differences of the centers and spread of the data.
Like before, the means of the rival and non-rival games are very similar, and the difference in means is well within one standard deviation of each other. This again points to a lack of a discernable relationship between playing a rival and completion percentage, but this will be explored graphically.
A lack of a relationship can be confirmed by a graphical analysis of comparative box plots in figure 5 below.
Altogether, there are again minor differences in centers and spread but still not nearly enough evidence to say there is an association between completion percentage and rival.
Yards per Drive
Lastly, this report seeks to understand the relationship between competing against a rival and yards per drive if present. Per usual, personal baises lead to the hypothesis there will be an increase in yards per drive when facing a rival.
Again, to understand the differences of the centers and spread of the data, table 3 (see below) was created to explore the mean and standard deviation grouped by rival.
Again, the means of the rival and non-rival games are extremely close and well within one standard deviation of each other. This again points to a lack of a clear relationship between playing a rival and completion percentage, but this will again be explored graphically.
The lack of a relationship can be confirmed by a graphical analysis of comparative box plots in figure 6 below.
Like pass attempts and completion percentage, there are minor differences in centers and spread but still not nearly enough evidence to say there is any relationship between yards per drive and rival.
Discussion
This analysis sought to find a relationship between rivalry and game performance, looking at 125 sets of pass statistics related to pass attempts, completion percentage, and yards per drive. Overall there does not appear to be any relationship between playing a rival and any of the variables of interest for the Green Bay Packers.
There are a few limitations to my analysis. Firstly, there are only 16 games recorded against the Bears. This is a small sample size lending itself to issues with random error. Next, of the 125 data points, 114 are from Aaron Rogers, making analysis not generalizable outside of him.
In looking into the possibility of any relationships further, there is the possibility of a relationship with a different variable or for these variables with a different team or across the league. This type of analysis can also be taken out of the realm of football and done with other sports and their associated performance metrics.
In the future, this type of analysis can help people make better fantasy football picks and place smarter bets on games.
