Introduction: For my project I will be exploring and hypothesizing how various variables and factors affect and work with each other in the success or failure of NFL quarterbacks. Sports Analysts will cite many different reasons for the success or failure of quarterbacks and while there is sometimes some agreement, these different takes often end in 2 or more analysts arguing why their reason or variable is the main factor and not something else. I will be trying to find some of the relationships between these different variables and seeing if there is any major factor that decides the success of quarterbacks through the data provided.
Dataset: The data I will be using was collected by Ron Yurko and consists of the passing performance from both quarterbacks in every NFL game from 2009 through the regular season of 2018. There is extensive data on the various aspects of the quarterback's game and many summarizing variables in terms of per drive, per attempt, or per completion. The main variables I will be focusing on are Times Hit, Interceptions, Attempts, TDs, EPA, and WPA. While Times Hit, Interceptions, and TDs are pretty self explanatory EPA and WPA take some explaining. EPA is the expected total points added, the data shows this in varying categories like Total EPA, EPA per attempt, per completion, per drive and many other variations like completion percent weighted by EPA and EPA in the clutch. WPA on the other hand is win percentage added and even though they measure them in similar categories as EPA like per drive, per attempt and all the other ones they measure very different statistics.
Research Scenarios:
Is the pressure a defense generates a leading factor in the success or failure of Quarterbacks?
If you watched the SuperBowl you know how dominant a good pass rush can be in an NFL game, being able to sit back and throw without worrying about getting hit is a huge benefit for any quarterback. For my first question I wanted to know how Times Hit translated to the other stats for a quarterback. To analyze this question I first compared Times Hit to Touchdowns in a given game with a Box Plot.
Does throwing more interceptions translate to less success at quarterback?
One of the other leading factors sports analysts cite when stating why a quarterback had a bad game was too many interceptions. Some could argue that interceptions are the result of a bad game but that other factors led to these interceptions, I want to analyze the relationship interceptions has to the success of a quarterback in this question. To begin I made a box plot comparing Total EPA and Interceptions.
With these plots you can see a clear correlation between interceptions and Total EPA, as interceptions increase the total EPA consistently decreases. This is evidence of a relationship between a quarterback's number of interceptions and they’re success in the overall points they were expected to contribute with their throws. What it doesn’t show is causation, a high number of interceptions and low EPA could both be the result of some other lurking variable instead of interceptions causing the low EPA. With my next graph I compared Interceptions to WPA using Box Plots.
Are Attempts a possible lurking variable responsible for negative associations with Times Hit and Interceptions?
Finding the cause of these different successes and failures of quarterbacks is something that would require further experimentation and random sampling as opposed to actual NFL games, with my question I hope to be able to identify if attempts is a possible lurking variable responsible for the correlation between certain variables I have observed in this report. I first analyzed the relationship attempts had with both Interceptions and TDs with 2 separate graphs showing box plots of the variables.
Conclusion: When looking at the stats for a quarterback it is often easy to look after the game and say whether they had a good game or a bad game. A much harder question is what caused the success or failure of this quarterback. While you can point at things like Interceptions, Times Hit, or simply whether or not they won the game there is almost always the possible question of what caused this negative stat. If it was interceptions then was it because of great coverage by the defense, a bad throw by the quarterback, or not being able to get the throw off properly because of 3 defensive lineman being in his face. If it was Times Hit is it because the quarterback took too long to throw the ball, poor blocking from their offensive line, or simply a bad game plan from the coach. To truly find what caused many of these stats for quarterbacks would require in depth analysis of every game, every throw, and every snap. The level of data you would need and the wide range in skill level of quarterbacks would make it difficult to truly find causation in just one game with one quarterback let alone finding universal causation for everyone that ends up throwing a pass in an NFL game.Watching athletes defy what is statistically likely to happen is a lot of times the most exciting part of the game. While the wide world of sports analytics grows and becomes more detailed every season I think there are some things in sports that you simply cannot measure, which is probably part of the reason they have become so popular.
